              Also by Amir Husain
               The Sentient Machine
            Generative AI for Leaders
Hyperwar: Conflict and Competition in the AI Century
                   Generative Art
Serious
Machines
Amir Husain (@amirhusain_tx)



AM Press
Austin
Copyright © 2024 by Amir Husain. All rights reserved.
Published by AM Press, Austin, Texas, USA.


No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning,
or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States
Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the publisher, or authorization
through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to publications@ampress.co


Fonts from Adobe
In all cases, photo attribution has been noted. Please direct any inquiries on photo usage to
publications@ampress.co


Requests to the publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Depart-
ment, AM Press, Austin, Texas, USA at publications@ampress.co


Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their
best efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect
to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any
implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may
be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and
strategies contained herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with
a professional where appropriate. Further, readers should be aware that websites listed
in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and
when it is read. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential,
or other damages.

AM Press also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that
appears in print may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about AM
Press products, visit our website at www.ampress.co.

Title: Serious Machines / Amir Husain.
Description: First edition. | Austin, TX: AM Press, [2024].

ISBN: 979-8-9884751-8-7 (paperback)
ISBN: 979-8-9884751-9-4 (hardcover)
Dedicated to my beloved wife and best friend, Zaib,
who has not only humored my eccentric passions but
also encouraged me as I amassed my collection of old
computers over the years. Her love, support, and pa-
tience have been my greatest source of strength and
motivation.
Table of Contents
Foreword                                        1

PART 1: The History                              9
  Communication vs. Computation                 11
  Growing up in the Age of Workstations         19
  The Early History of Technical Computing      27
  The Need for Workstations                     39
  The Dawn of the Workstation Age               73

PART 2: What Makes A Workstation?               93
  The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation    95
  Networking Workstations                      113

PART 3: The Players                            123
  Sun                                          125
  Thinking Machines                            135
  Apollo/Domain                                143
  Hewlett-Packard                              153
  IBM RS/6000                                  161
  Silicon Graphics                             171
  NeXT                                         185
  Mac Meets Unix                               193
PART 4: The Evolution of the Workstation   203
  The Workstation Revolution               205
  Every PC a Workstation                   213
  Single Board Computers                   231
  Workstation Software                     243

PART 5: The Fall and the Future            261
  The Future of Workstations               263
  Where Are They Now?                      289

Conclusion                                 303
About the Author                           307
Foreword
A movie poster advertising the 1991
release of Terminator 2: Judgment Day.
Fair use.
                            Foreword




Imagine the year is 1984. You go to the movie the-
ater and watch The Terminator. You’re blown away by the sto-
ry and the time travel. The special effects? Well, they don’t
exactly blow you away, but they’re fine…for the time. Now
fast forward to 1991. You’ve waited forever for a sequel to
come along, and Terminator 2: Judgment Day is finally here.
You can’t wait to find out how John Connor turns from a
sympathetic kid in the foster care system to the head of the
resistance against the machines.
    You sit down in your chair with your popcorn and soda
and watch the trailers. Then the feature film comes on. For the
Terminator, you’re expecting something similar to the T-800
endoskeleton from the first movie, but then onto the screen
walks T-1000. To say he’s advanced is an understatement. He
shatters into a million pieces…and reforms. His head is blown
in half…and knits itself back together. He takes a grenade to
the chest…and nearly comes through before falling into mol-
ten steel and finally succumbing. The special effects are like
nothing you’ve ever seen. Now this is science-fiction movie
making! But what happened in those seven years that made
this possible?

                              3
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    The short answer? Workstations. In Terminator 2: Judgment
Day, the power of the workstation was harnessed to develop
one of the first full-textured 3D computer-generated anima-
tions and fully computer-generated characters in a feature film.
It was one of the most ambitious computer-based film-mak-
ing projects ever attempted. Movie making would never be
the same. Sure, not all movies would have the budget of James
Cameron’s hit, but powerful computers could now be used to
create the effects that previously had been done by hand.
    I personally want to offer up my thanks for this great con-
tribution of workstations. It was contributions like this and
seeing the power of computing in action that helped solidify
my fascination with these machines—a fascination I want to
share.
    What is your earliest memory of computers? For those of
us born in the 1970s and ‘80s, it’s the Commodore 64 and
the TRS-80, home computers that offered a platform to learn
programming and maybe even play a video game here or there,
too. Or perhaps your earliest memory of computers was the
IBM PC, with its series of numbers including the 8086, 386,
and 486.
    The first computer I ever used was a Commodore 64. I re-
member it so clearly. Jumpman was the first game I saw, with
its rudimentary graphics appearing on the connected televi-
sion. My parents later bought me a PC compatible system—
an 8088 which I was able to upgrade to the far more powerful
80386. For children of the 1990s, the graphical interface of
Windows became the norm, CD ROMS offered the potential
to replace World Book Encyclopedias, and the early Internet

                               4
                              Foreword
opened up communication around the world.
    Now computers fill our world, but for most of us, we own,
use, and interact with just one type: computers designed for
consumers. We use these at home to balance our checkbooks.
We play online games with our friends. We catch up on our
work email late at night. These home computers expand our
world, and we can’t imagine our lives without them, but they’re
only one segment of the market.
    This book is about the “other” computers. The serious ma-
chines. The machines that run computer-aided design to build
our modern world. The machines that simulate how the fastest
fighter jets will fly and how airliners can be made safer. The
ones that help us predict the weather, run our air traffic control
systems, and bring us amazing graphics like the T-1000. The
ones on which we write software applications for “real” work.
    Both types of computers—consumer systems and seri-
ous machines—have changed the world. There is no question
about that. But whereas consumer systems are used for games
and applications that mostly focus on communications—web
browsing, chatting, video conferencing or writing letters to
send to people—serious computers are most often used to
compute. They are used to execute powerful simulations, to
model the world and its physical processes, to use the iterative
potential of today’s powerful processors to create things that
can only be created as digital artifacts in a digital world. We
are only now beginning to understand the power of computa-
tion and the many possibilities it will enable. Our first glimpse
of these possibilities is likely to be through the lens of a serious
machine.

                                 5
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    When it comes to communication, most of us know what
computers can do. We understand the power of sending an
email and having it reach halfway across the world within sec-
onds. We open a meeting on Zoom and video chat with four
other people, each in a different city around the world. What
once seemed an impossible feat has now become so common
that we take it for granted. We are immersed in the powers of
communication, and we take full advantage of it.
    What most of us don’t understand is the true power of
computation. The reason? It’s not often we, as general con-
sumers, need to think about what possibilities computation
opens up. Yes, most of us are aware that “powerful” computers
are used in nameless, faceless labs or data centers to conduct
“research.” Perhaps they predict the weather or compute the
pixels that come together to form a picture in an advanced
physics simulation. But the applications that we, the consumer,
actually use on any given day that allow us to feel the compu-
tational power of computers are few and far between.
    Loading a web page? Sure, powerful computation occurs
in the background, but the consumer experience is that of a
thing being sent from elsewhere to load on a screen. Shopping
on Amazon? Again, massive infrastructure and databases exist
in the background, but all we, as the shopper, see are “Based on
your viewing history” oddly accurate products we’d like to buy.
What about Discord, WhatsApp, or Facebook? Again, these
are powerful sites, but from the user’s perspective, these are all
principally communication activities. Where are the applica-
tions that allow ordinary people to use the power of computa-
tion to create and investigate things?

                                6
                            Foreword
     Of course, such applications exist, but they are generally
only used by highly trained professionals. There’s comput-
er-aided design, computer-aided manufacturing, comput-
er-aided diagnostics. A quick Internet search turns up a whole
host of “computer-aided” areas of work. The trick with most of
these is that focused training is required. One does not simply
sit down at a computer and begin designing a circuit board. Yet
a consumer can open Facebook, start an account, and be post-
ing comments and photos within minutes. Training is mini-
mal. But try using AutoCAD, and it’s a very different story.
You won’t get far without investing some time to learn the
software.
     Yet the times, they are a-changin’. With Generative AI and
the power of large language models (LLMs) behind applica-
tions like ChatGPT, individual users are starting to experience
the power of computing as it relates to generating content that
didn’t previously exist. AI is becoming a natural language user
interface that sits atop serious computers and democratiz-
es their power, making it accessible to the world. Consumers
are beginning to get a taste for what serious computers can
do. They are getting a sneak peek at the hallowed halls of the
mainframe room…the data center…the lab filled with work-
stations. They are getting a peek at this rarefied atmosphere.
     With this book, I hope to bring some of the stories and
experiences from that rare atmosphere down to earth. To show
how it all began, and to see where it is now. To look at where
it’s going in the future. Now let’s get started.




                              7
PART 1
The History
Communication
vs. Computation
A movie poster advertising the 2016
release of Hidden Figures. Fair use.
                   Communication vs. Computation




In the 19th and early 20th centuries, the word
“computer” was a label used for not a machine, but a hu-
man profession. Large numbers of primarily women were
employed in white collar “factories” that produced mathe-
matical compendiums such as logarithmic tables for use in
commerce, industry, and defense. NASA employed these
“computers” in the early years of the space program to com-
pute complex calculations.
    A great example of this is seen in the movie Hidden Fig-
ures, where Katherine Johnson, Dorothy Vaughan, and Mary
Jackson helped America win the space race with their detailed
calculations. These calculations were performed painstaking-
ly by hand and then checked by other humans. Since certain
types of mathematical functions were unintuitive to calculate
by hand, these human computers would produce tables for a
wide range of input values… a calculation applied to a huge set
of numbers, one by one. The hope was that these ready-to-use
tables would allow science and engineering to be sped up in
the real world by reducing the lengthy calculations needed to
a mere table look up.



                               13
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




Katherine Johnson at NASA in 1966. Photo credit: NASA. Public domain



                                 14
                    Communication vs. Computation
    Faced with a challenging trajectory calculation, a gunner
could look up the value for range based on inputs in a book-
let that provided pre-computed settings for altitude and azi-
muth. No need for on-the-fly math. The gunner would use the
numbers that corresponded to his environmental conditions
to jump to the relevant page in the book, then simply read
off the answers connected with the inputs provided. That’s the
bearing. That’s the elevation. Done.
    Today, to think that each important function would need
to be compiled in book form, with range values for a sizable
domain of inputs, is inconceivable. We are used to spreadsheets
and digital calculators. In a few seconds, we can use Excel to
compute answers for any range of inputs or produce answers
on the fly in response to dynamic inputs.
    But from this inconceivable complexity sprung forth the
need for modern computers. Computers were intended for…
well…computing—not merely for communications. And
while computers as communicators have changed the world
in countless ways, our use of their true potential as powerful
computational tools has lagged behind.
    In the world of WhatsApp, Facebook, email, Zoom, and
much, much more, we use computers chock-full of enough
processing power to compute pi to a mind-boggling number
of digits to serve as little more than connectivity tools. The ma-
chines connect humans. In many cases, it becomes the com-
puter’s sole purpose in life, much like C-3PO, an advanced
droid built merely for etiquette and protocol.
    Undoubtedly, the communication function of computers
has been revolutionary. It has unlocked access to opinions and

                                15
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

knowledge that exist anywhere on this planet at any given mo-
ment. It allows us to easily, cheaply, and quickly reach infor-
mation which already exists. In the global COVID-19 pan-
demic, it facilitated online school and work-from-home for
many jobs, holding off a scenario that could have collapsed the
entire global economy. Five stars for communication!
    But if we, as consumers, unlocked the power of the ma-
chine to a higher degree—if we explored its computational
abilities—where could that power lead us? The answer? The
potential is limitless. Computation ability is that powerful
quality that can result in things that don’t yet exist. Things
that have never been seen, and concepts that have never been
dreamed up.
    Communication unlocks what is. Computation creates
something entirely new.
    This book is an exploration of the history of serious ma-
chines—machines that were designed for computation. The
workstation—the serious computer—allowed engineers and
scientists to perform complex calculations and run simula-
tions that were once impossible. Through the pages of this
book, we explore the history of the workstation and its impact
on the fields of engineering and science. From the early days
of the computer to the latest advancements in hardware and
software, we examine how workstations have revolutionized
the way we approach problems in various fields. We then peer
ahead in time to imagine a future for serious computers.
    Through our journey, we will examine the evolution of
workstation computers through this lens of communication
and computation. As we trace the origins of these important

                              16
                   Communication vs. Computation
computers and their development, we will face the key issues
and questions that their designers confronted. The compro-
mises that had to be made. And we will take a look at what we
can expect in the future. In doing so, I hope also to communi-
cate to my readers the power that lies untapped in automated
computation.
    Let’s look at the one engine that can build it all. The one
power that can create anew. Computation.




                               17
Growing up
in the Age of
Workstations
A screenshot from Mosaic 1.0. Mosaic
1.0 was one of the first web browsers to
become widely available. It was writ-
ten by Marc Andreessen and Eric Bina.
Fair use.
                Growing up in the Age of Workstations




In 1998, I was a student of Computer Science at
the University of Texas at Austin. Back then, the college ex-
perience for a computer science student was quite a bit differ-
ent from what it is today. Laptops were expensive, and most
students couldn’t afford them. In order to complete their as-
signments, students had to use computers at university labs.
These labs were generally filled with Unix workstations, like
the SGI O2s that I used at UT Austin. Because we didn’t
have powerful machines like these at home, it was only in
these labs that students had access to the latest technology
and software. For many of us, experiencing the multitasking,
multi-user nature of Unix running on powerful machines
was thrilling. It was a stark contrast to the much less power-
ful DOS PC that we were likely to have at home for typing
up reports and sending emails to professors.




                               21
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




An SGI O2 from my collection, just like the ones I used at UT Austin. A
    C-5 Galaxy hologram floats over it! Photo credit: Amir Husain


    One of the most notable differences for Unix machines was
the software that was available on these workstations—Mosa-
ic and Netscape, for example. These were early web browsers
that allowed students to easily navigate the Internet, which
itself was in its infancy at the time. These workstations also
provided access to centralized storage systems via NFS (Net-
work File System), which allowed students to easily share and
collaborate on projects with classmates.
    Another aspect of the college experience for a student
like me, in the 1990s, was the use of instant messaging ap-
plications, like the talk command or IRC (Internet Relay

                                  22
                   Growing up in the Age of Workstations
Chat). These programs allowed students, hobbyists, and in-
terest-based community members to communicate with each
other in real-time, even if they were in different labs, buildings,
campuses, or countries. This made it easier to learn from oth-
ers, make friends, work together on projects, and ask for help
when needed.




The first IRC server was this Sun 3 server. Photo credit: Urpo Lankinen,
           User:Wwwwolf at Wikimedia Commons, CC BY 2.5


                                  23
                       SERIOUS MACHINES


    The Unix workstations, like our SGI O2s, also provided
a superior environment for writing and testing software. The
operating system and software development tools on Unix at
the time were far more advanced than what was available on
a DOS or Windows PC. This meant students could develop
more complex and sophisticated programs than they would
have been able to otherwise.
    The qualitative difference in experience between these Unix
workstations and the Macintosh or PC at home was palpable.
These workstations provided computational power at a level
we’d never worked with hands-on before. It was a unique and
unparalleled learning experience that helped shape the careers
of many computer science students in the 1990s. The sense of
getting access to powerful cutting-edge technology sparked a
kind of inventiveness that is hard to put into words.
    It was these very Unix workstations and the software avail-
able on them that provided a foundation for the future of
computing. My first company, Kurion, was launched in 1999
based on software I wrote on such machines. The company
offered website personalization engines and was purchased by
iSyndicate in 2001. I was just one of many such innovators
harnessing this power of computation.
    While at the University of Illinois, Marc Andreessen wrote
the first version of the Internet browser Mosaic in 1993 on an
SGI Indigo. After graduating, he went on to co-found Nets-
cape Communications and release their flagship browser, Net-
scape Navigator. But Marc and I were only two amongst tens
of thousands of computer science students who harnessed this

                              24
                Growing up in the Age of Workstations
technology. We took advantage of what was available to us and
used it to launch successful careers in the field. We were the
Tim Paterson, the Bill Gates, and the Steve Jobs of our time.
It was an exciting time, and we reveled in it.




      SGI Indigo 2 Impact 10000. Photo credit: Amir Husain


   With this book, I want to convey some of this excite-
ment—and historical context. Books have been written on the
Commodore 64, the Amiga, the Apple II, and early Macin-
tosh computers. Workstations were around, but they existed
behind the veil. Not enough has been said about them. Yet,
these “serious” computers changed our world. They continue to
change our world. Let’s look at how all this happened.


                               25
The Early
History of
Technical
Computing
The cover from Norbert Wiener's essay
"The Theory of Ignorance" from 1906.
Public Domain.
               The Early History of Technical Computing




In the early days of computing, all computers
were serious machines. Computers were simply too expen-
sive and experimental to be anything but. A small group of
scientists and engineers saw potential in computers as the
ultimate tools. They saw that, unlike anything else that had
been built previously, computers had two very powerful prop-
erties. First, they were general purpose and could be applied
to almost any problem. And second, they were amplifiers for
the “mental muscle.” Mechanical devices, like cranes and le-
vers, had amplified human physical potential. Computers,
with their computational abilities, would now amplify our
cognitive capabilities. But before computers could hope to
realize this promise, a lot of work had to be done.
    Mathematician and philosopher Norbert Wiener was one
of the giants of this early period of computing. Born in 1864,
Wiener was a child prodigy, who at the age of ten wrote “The
Theory of Ignorance,” a paper arguing that human knowl-
edge was based on approximation and that it was impossible
to be absolutely certain about anything, disputing the belief
that knowledge has no limits. He was one of the first to the-
orize that all intelligent behavior was the result of feedback

                                29
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

                             mechanisms. He believed these
                             feedback mechanisms could be
                             simulated by machines. Does this
                             sound familiar? It should. This was
                             the birth of artificial intelligence,
                             and his theory was an important
                             step towards the development of
                             modern AI.
                                 Wiener imagined humans and
                             machines existing as a single sys-
                             tem. He developed an entire area
                             of study, Cybernetics, to study how
                             such systems would function. In
                             doing so, he made significant con-
                             tributions theoretically and practi-
                             cally, helping demonstrate the use
Norbert Wiener in Zurich in
     1932. Photo credit:     of computers as control systems
       Public domain.        for the military.
                                 During World War II, Wiener
 was teaching mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of
 Technology (MIT). He was already well known in academ-
 ic circles, having attained a PhD at the age of eighteen and
 becoming a professor at twenty-five. While at MIT, Wiener
 began working on the government’s anti-aircraft fire control
 project. German dive bombers and other Luftwaffe aircraft
 posed a significant threat as part of the Blitzkrieg, or “Light-
 ning War” strategy. The military wanted a way to counter them
 by improving the efficacy of air defense guns.
     Wiener was tasked with developing automated control

                                30
                 The Early History of Technical Computing
systems that could calculate target solutions and direct an-
ti-aircraft guns so that they would more effectively engage
enemy aircraft. These new machines—these computers—al-
lowed him to achieve this goal. It also laid the foundation for
the Wiener filter—a filter that reduced the amount of noise
in a signal by comparing it to a desired signal with no noise—
along with other contributions to information theory. Wiener’s
work would later influence the field of neural networks, too.




A block diagram of the Wiener Filter for discrete series. Image credit:
                         Public domain




                                  31
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




      A noisy image of an astronaut. Image credit: Public domain




The same image after the Mathematica WienerFilter[] function has been
                applied. Image credit: Public domain




                                 32
                The Early History of Technical Computing
     As for where cybernetics has
taken us or will continue to take
us, look no further than pop cul-
ture. In case you’re a fan of Isaac
Asimov’s books (and his coined
term “positronic brain”), you
can thank Wiener and his early
work in cybernetics. In his 1942
short story, Runaround, Asimov
came up with his famous Three
Laws of Robotics.


                                   First edition cover of I, Robot by Isaac
                                              Asimov from 1950.
   Three Laws of Robotics:                  Image credit: Fair use

   ◊ First Law: A robot may not injure a human being or,
     through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm.
   ◊ Second Law: A robot must obey the orders given it by
     human beings except where such orders would conflict
     with the First Law.
   ◊ Third Law: A robot must protect its own existence as
     long as such protection does not conflict with the First
     or Second Law.

    Writer Robert A. Heinlein also paid homage to Wiener
by naming a spaceship after him in his 1957 novel Citizen of
the Galaxy. There’s even a crater on the far side of the moon
named after Wiener. How many people can claim that honor?

                                 33
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

Quite a few, it turns out. As of the writing of this book, there
are 9137 recognized craters on the moon, many of which are
named after famous scientists. The practice of naming moon
craters began in 1651 when the first crater was named after
Italian astronomer Giovanni Battista Riccioli.
     Meanwhile, another pioneer in the field of computers help-
ing amplify our cognitive capabilities—though one who does
not have a moon crater named after him—was Vannevar Bush,
an inventor and engineer and founder of the company Ray-
theon. In the 1930s, he began working on the development
of an information management system called the “memex.”
Bush, who had been the Dean of MIT’s School of Engineer-
ing and was the director of the Office of Scientific Research
and Development during World War II, believed that the rap-
idly growing amount of information in the world would soon
become overwhelming.
     To address this challenge, he conceived the hypothetical
electromechanical device, the memex—a machine that would
allow its users to easily save and retrieve information. The name
itself was a portmanteau of “memory” and “expansion,” and the
thinking was that it would be used as an automatic personal
filing system. In his 1945 article “As We May Think,” pub-
lished in the Atlantic Monthly, Bush described the memex as a
desk with a microfilm viewer that would allow a user to easily
create links between different pieces of information. Though
the memex itself was never designed and built, the concept is
similar to the way links work on the modern Internet.




                               34
                  The Early History of Technical Computing




The Memex of Vannevar Bush. A scientist of the future records experi-
ments with a tiny camera fitted with universal-focus lens. The small square
 in the eyeglass at the left sights the object. Image credit: Public domain


    While Wiener’s work focused on using automated com-
putation for military applications and control systems, Bush’s
memex proposed a new way to manage and navigate the vast
amount of information that was becoming available. Both
these pioneers shaped the way we think about and use com-
puters today. But perhaps even more importantly, their ideas
provided clear examples of the power computers could bring
to companies, governments, and militaries. Documents could


                                    35
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

be managed at scale, weapons could be made more efficient,
and human intelligence could be augmented. Wiener, in par-
ticular, was a great believer in using the power of automation
to improve the human condition. This is a hope and goal that
continues to motivate many researchers in the field.
    Of course, computers have come a long way since those
early days. Their use has grown vastly, and now they serve us
in all areas of life—from entertainment and health, to work
and safety. Computers are used for fun, for play, and also for
serious work. They have proliferated widely and come in all
shapes and sizes.
    Workstation computers, used much more on an individual
level, inherited the goal of helping us work more efficiently.
They did so by delegating control to us—by putting power in
our own hands. A workstation computer allowed every knowl-
edge worker to obtain access to a personal yet powerful tool to
investigate, analyze, design, and reduce ideas to practice.
    If we travel back in time from workstation computers, we
have mainframes. But how did this transition from main-
frames to workstations occur? Let’s explore this history in the
pages ahead.




                              36
The Need for
Workstations
The Harwell Dekatron Computer was an
early UK relay computer from the 1950s.
Public Domain.
                     The Need for Workstations




What seems so obvious to us today—that com-
puters are personal—wasn’t quite as obvious in the 40s, 50s,
and 60s. Mainframe computers ruled in those days, and the
only way to access their power was to share them with a host
of other users and researchers. But it didn’t start with main-
frames. The story started before there. Let’s take a look.


Whirlwind
The Whirlwind project at the Massachusetts In-
stitute of Technology (MIT) was a pioneering effort in the
early development of the computer industry. Beginning in
the late 1940s, in the era of the Cold War, the project aimed
to create a real-time, high-performance computer that could
be used for a wide range of applications, including scientific
research, military operations, and even business.




                               41
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




Sections of core memory and controls, Whirlwind Computer, Museum of
           Science, Boston, MA. Photo credit: Public domain


    Funding for the Whirlwind project was provided by the
United States Navy. They wanted to see if it would be possible
to develop a computer that could power a flight simulator for
bomber crews. When one is looking to develop a computer
for such a purpose, the first natural place to turn is MIT. The
Naval Research Lab approached MIT about the possibility of
creating their flight simulator computer, and the project was
started. Jay Forrester, a professor at MIT and an electrical en-
gineer by training, was appointed the project’s director. The de-
sired design was for a computer that could continually update
                                42
                      The Need for Workstations
an instrument panel in a simulation based on inputs from pi-
lots. Unlike its predecessor, Link Trainer, which was developed
in the 1930s and had been used for this purpose, Whirlwind
would have the ability to adapt to any type of plane. This was
important at a time when new aerodynamic designs were be-
ing introduced on a regular basis.
    To achieve its purposes, Whirlwind pioneered many design
elements, but two stood out. One notable design element was
its use of magnetic core memory—a new technology at the
time. Not only did Jay Forrester lead the project, he invented
this random access nonvolatile magnetic core memory, which
was a big facilitator of modern computing. Another notable
design element was parallel computation. Before this, comput-
ers were designed to run single tasks in batch mode, and mem-
ory was mostly accessed from cathode ray tubes, which could
be slow and unreliable. With parallel computation and mag-
netic core memory, the Whirlwind computer became much
faster and more reliable than existing machines, which used
vacuum tubes or relays.
    Another key innovation of Whirlwind was its use of an
oscilloscope for a display. This allowed the computer to display
real-time information, such as the solutions to equations that
it had solved. This was a significant breakthrough at the time,
as it allowed the computer to be used for interactive applica-
tions, such as real-time control systems and simulations.




                               43
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




Circuitry from Whirlwind's core memory unit. Photo credit: Dpbsmith.
                           CC BY-SA 3.0


    In case you thought it was all work, Whirlwind is a con-
tender for the distinction of having the first animated comput-
er graphic game (though what actually qualifies as a “game” is
debatable). Somewhere between 1951 and 1953, programmers
Charles Adams, Oliver Aberth, and Jack Gilmore, who were
working on Whirlwind, generated a graphic of a bouncing
ball. The ball would appear at the top of the screen, fall to
the bottom, and then bounce off the sides and the floor. The
programmers further updated the program such that the op-
erator could adjust the controls in an attempt to get the ball to

                                44
                        The Need for Workstations
fall through a hole in the floor. If video games are your thing,
thank Whirlwind! And if you want to try your luck firsthand
at this video game, there’s a simulator where you can play.

https://www.retrogamedeconstructionzone.com/2021/07/
the-whirlwind-bouncing-ball-simulator.html




The bouncing ball can be see in this reproduction of a slide from Norman
Taylor’s 1989 SIGGRAPH presentation. Note the hole at the bottom.
                         Photo credit: Fair use


   Whirlwind’s innovation extended to software, as is seen
with its use of an operating system called Director, written by
programmers John Frankovich and Frank Helwig. The idea of
the operating system was to connect a heavy-duty, mechanical
tape reader called a Flexowriter to a photoelectric tape reader.

                                  45
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

This eliminated the need for a human to feed the tapes to
Whirlwind and allowed the computer to read tapes for a vari-
ety of problems in a single computing session. This was a sig-
nificant departure from the batch-processing systems, which
were common at the time. Though a far cry from Windows 11,
it is fair to say that this early software work laid the foundation
for the development of modern operating systems.




A commemorative plaque outside the original Whirlwind building at
               MIT. Photo credit: Public domain

    The Whirlwind project used vacuum tubes, but scientists
then decided to attempt to make the Whirlwind design with
transistors. This led to the development of the TX-0, which

                                46
                       The Need for Workstations
stood for Transistorized Ex-
perimental computer zero,
lovingly referred to as tixo.
The project was started in
1955 and was led by Ken
Olson. The TX-0 was big
                                      An advertisement for the
(64K of 18-bit words of           Philco Surface Barrier Transistor
magnetic memory), but not            for the firt high-frequency
big enough, so the TX-1            transistors, which were used in
                                              the TX-0.
was conceived. However,
                                    Photo credit: Public Domain
the TX-1 was a bit too am-
bitious, so the project was scaled back, becoming the TX-2.
    Ken Olson, meanwhile, left the project and went on to co-
found Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in 1957. DEC
came out with the PDP-1 (Programmed Data Processor-1) in
1959, which had many of the concepts of the TX-0 and TX-2
but was presented in a smaller package.
    Many of the technologies and ideas Whirlwind produced
were also later used in the development of operating systems
and national security-oriented computers such as the SAGE
air defense system, which was the nation’s first air defense sys-
tem. The Whirlwind project was a significant milestone in the
development of the computer industry. It has had a lasting
impact on the field of computer engineering, and it produced
many of the components that would ultimately make worksta-
tion computers possible.




                                47
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

A SAGE to protect North America
A successor to Whirlwind, the SAGE (Semi-Auto-
matic Ground Environment) computer system, was another
groundbreaking development in the field of computer tech-
nology during the Cold War. Developed in the 1950s by
MIT, IBM, and a consortium of other technology companies,
SAGE was the first geographically distributed, real-time
computer system used for military purposes. The system was
intended to detect and track incoming Soviet bombers and
to provide information to military operators so they could
make decisions about how to intercept aerial intruders. This
detection, categorization, and real-time response capability
formed the basis of NORAD’s (North American Air De-
fense Command) operations.
     One of the most notable features of the SAGE system was
its size and complexity. The system comprised 23 regional cen-
ters situated around the country, each of which was connected
to a network of radar sites and air defense sites. In total, the
system required over 50,000 vacuum tubes, which made it the
largest and most powerful computer system of its time. Be-
cause of its size and complexity, the system also needed a large
amount of power and cooling, which meant that it had to be
housed in specially designed underground bunkers.
     SAGE, like Whirlwind before it, was also notable for its
use of advanced technology. For example, it too used a faster
magnetic core memory, which allowed for rapid data process-
ing and retrieval. The system’s vast programming needs helped
pioneer and improve many ideas in software engineering,

                              48
                        The Need for Workstations
including modularity via generalized subroutines.
    Despite its advanced technology, SAGE was not without
its problems. The system was plagued by a number of bugs
and glitches, which caused delays in its development and de-
ployment. The system was extremely expensive to build and
maintain, with a cost running into the billions of dollars in the
1950s and 60s!




The SAGE system was made up of 23 regional centers situated around the
               country. Image credit: Public domain


    Despite these challenges, SAGE was a major milestone in
the development of computer technology. The system demon-
strated the potential of computers and computer networks,
and it paved the way for future developments in military de-
fense systems. The system had a number of spin-offs, such as


                                 49
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

the creation of the first computer-based air traffic control sys-
tem in Jacksonville, Florida and the development of the first
computerized telephone exchange. The SAGE program also
led to the establishment of the first computer science research
center at MIT.




This photo, taken during equipment installation at the SAGE Combat
Center at Syracuse Air Force Station The display was projected from
                  above. Photo credit: Public domain


   The SAGE computer system was a groundbreaking devel-
opment in the field of computer technology. As the first geo-
graphically distributed, real-time computer system used for
military defense purposes, it paved the way for future develop-
ments in computing and in military defense systems. SAGE

                                50
                       The Need for Workstations
was a major milestone in the development of computer net-
works, sensor processing, and databases.




A now-abandoned SAGE direction center at what was Stewart Air Force
     Base in New York. Photo credit: Acroterion. CC BY-SA 4.0


    As for where it is now, well, it’s not all in one piece. That
would need to be a very large museum to house SAGE. But
pieces of the dismantled SAGE system can be found in var-
ious museums around the country. In addition, many early
science-fiction films use decommissioned pieces of SAGE as
movie props. Next time you’re watching Voyage to the Bottom of
the Sea (1961), Dr. Strangelove (1964), or Colossus (1970), keep
your eyes peeled for SAGE! And for any who may have seen
the 2012 movie The Colony starring Bill Paxton and Laurence
Fishburne, part of it was filmed in “The Hole”—one of the
actual bunkers that used to house SAGE.

                                51
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

The Birth of the Mainframes
While the military was funding projects like
Whirlwind and SAGE, computers were becoming relevant
for civilian applications, too. The dawn of commercial com-
puting with mainframes marked the beginning of a new era
in the history of computing.
    The first mainframe, the UNIVAC I (Universal Automatic
Computer), was developed by the Eckert-Mauchly Computer
Corporation. It was an updated version of the ENIAC (Elec-
tronic Numeric Integrator and Computer) and was installed at
the United States Census Bureau in 1951.
    This massive machine, weighing in at over 7 tons, was ca-
pable of performing nearly two thousand calculations per sec-
ond and was considered a technological marvel at the time. In-
puts were fed to the machine first by magnetic computer tape
and later by punch cards. Its hard work then began, tabulating
information on the 1950 and 1954 population and economic
censuses. It was great at these repetitive tasks, thankfully re-
moving the burden from humans.
    These “mainframe” computers got their names from the
cabinets where they were stored, called main frames, and gen-
erally occupied large halls. They were used primarily for batch
processing, which involved the submission of numerous com-
putational jobs by various users into a queue, with the out-
put being produced and returned at a later time. Get your job
submitted first? Get your results first. Procrastinate and get
behind a string of other jobs? Well, it’s time to pour yourself
a big cup of coffee…and maybe catch your favorite TV show

                              52
                       The Need for Workstations
(perhaps the top-rated 1950s Lone Ranger), because you’re go-
ing to be waiting.
    Though revolutionary for the time in that these computers
took care of the repetitive tasks, this batch-processing method
of computing presented a number of problems, such as long
wait times for results and the inability to interact with the
computer in real-time. If a programmer made a mistake, they
wouldn’t find out until results were available, usually a day or
two later. This made the process of debugging programs nearly
intolerable.




A UNIVAC I at the United States Census Bureau in 1951. Photo credit:
                         Public Domain


    To address the inconveniences of mainframes, the concept
of time-sharing was introduced. Time-sharing allowed multi-
ple users to share the resources of a mainframe by dividing the
computer’s time into small slices, with each user having access
to the machine for a brief period of time. This allowed for
more efficient use of the mainframe and made it possible for

                                53
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

users to interact with the computer in real-time. They could
run small pieces of their programs, check the results, and up-
date accordingly. Debugging became much more tolerable. It
was here that the concept of “multi-user,” later a major feature
of Unix systems and workstations, was born.




An ENIAC being programmed at the Ballistic Research Laboratory in
   Maryland between 1947 and 1955. Photo credit: Public domain


    But how could more than one person access these comput-
ers? There was usually only a single console for these systems.
Enter terminals—dumb devices with a display and keyboard
dedicated to each individual user. These devices, which were
typically connected to the mainframe via a serial connection

                               54
                      The Need for Workstations
running at 300 or 1200 bits per second, allowed users to inter-
act with the computer remotely and provided a visual display
of the computer’s output. This made it possible for users to
work from any location and greatly improved the accessibility
of mainframes.
    The problem, of course, was that sharing a mainframe still
had its drawbacks. Could a user get enough power—enough
compute cycles—if other users were bogging down the sys-
tem? Could they control the mainframe and install whatever
software they wished on their own? Could they control or dic-
tate the maintenance schedule of the centrally administered
mainframe? The answers to most of these questions was “no!”
Just ask anyone who worked in IT during this time.


The Minicomputer Era
In the 1960s and 1970s, a new class of computers
emerged that filled the gap between large and expensive
mainframe computers and smaller, limited capability micro-
computers. These new computers sold at a lower price than a
mainframe (lower price meaning less than $25,000!) and are
credited with being the computers that spawned the hacker
culture at places like MIT. These "minicomputers," as they
came to be called, brought the power of computing to a much
wider range of businesses, scientific institutions, and eventu-
ally even homes, at a fraction of the cost of larger mainframes.
    If the mainframe was the computer for the entire corpora-
tion, the minicomputer could be bought by a department for
specialized and dedicated tasks.

                               55
                           SERIOUS MACHINES




Control Data 160-A computer. The paper-tape reader and punch is on
the right (input and output for the computer) and on the left is a 7-track
            tape unit. Photo credit: Jitze Couperus, CC BY 2.0


                                   56
                      The Need for Workstations
    The birthplace of the minicomputer is generally considered
to be Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC). In December
1959, DEC introduced the PDP-1, the first computer that
pioneered many key minicomputer traits—it was smaller and
less expensive than mainframes of the time, used a simple ac-
cumulator-based architecture, and interacted with the user via
terminals and teleprinters rather than punched cards.
    However, some point to the CDC 160, introduced by Con-
trol Data Corporation in 1960 and designed by the legendary
Seymour Cray, as the first shipping minicomputer. Though
more expensive than later models, the transistorized CDC
160 was smaller than typical mainframes and set the stage for
the later minicomputer boom.
    These early minicomputers made incalculably significant
contributions to the development of computing. For example,
the DEC PDP-1 was not only a platform for serious work, but
also the host for one of the earliest and most influential video
games.
    In 1962, a group of students at MIT, including Steve Rus-
sell, Martin Graetz, and Wayne Wiitanen, developed Space-
war!, a two-player game simulating a space battle between
spaceships. Inspired by the science-fiction novels of E. E.
"Doc" Smith, Spacewar! featured realistic physics and graphics
that pushed the PDP-1's capabilities to their limits. The game
was an instant hit among the early hacker community and
was soon ported to other minicomputer systems. Spacewar!
was more than entertainment—it was a proof of concept for
interactive graphical computing and laid the groundwork for
the video game industry. Significantly, it was one of the first

                               57
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

games to run on a minicomputer rather than a massive main-
frame, hinting at the potential for the interactive, real-time
applications that would define the minicomputer era. And in
case you'd like to see how you fare with Spacewar!, yes, there is
a simulator for that one, too.

https://www.masswerk.at/spacewar/




Spacewar! on the Computer History Museum's PDP-1. Photo credit:
               Kenneth Lu - Spacewar!, CC BY 2.0


    Where is the machine now? Thankfully, Ken Olson and
Robert Everett saved the machine from getting junked, and it
went on to become the foundation for the Boston Computer
Museum in 1979. The Computer History Museum in Moun-
tain View ran an amazing restoration project to get a PDP-1

                               58
                      The Need for Workstations
operational again, and I very fondly recall multiple visits to see
this remarkable machine. Today, you can find it in the Com-
puter History Museum in Mountain View, California.




A display of the PDP-1 at Mountain View's Computer History Museum.
              Photo credit: Alexey Komarov, CC BY-SA 4.0


    The minicomputer market really took off with the intro-
duction of the DEC PDP-8 in 1965. Costing only $18,000
and small enough to fit in the corner of a lab, the PDP-8 is
regarded as the first true minicomputer and one of the most
successful computers in history, with over 50,000 units sold.
Along with later DEC models like the PDP-11, it inspired
an entire generation of minicomputer companies along Route
128 outside Boston, including Data General, Wang Laborato-
ries, Prime Computer, and Hewlett-Packard.

                               59
                           SERIOUS MACHINES

   CDC was a formidable competitor in the minicomputer
arena with systems like the CDC 1700. Released in 1965, the
1700 found success in real-time data acquisition and process
control applications. In the 1970s, CDC's Cyber 18 minicom-
puter offered a low-cost entry point to CDC's larger 6000 and
Cyber series mainframes.




 A PDP–11/70 system that included two nine-track tape drives, two disk
drives, a high speed line printer, a DECwriter dot-matrix keyboard print-
ing terminal and a cathode ray tube terminal installed in a climate-con-
       trolled machine room. Photo credit: Kozan, Public Domain


   CDC also pioneered the use of minicomputers for com-
puter-based education with its PLATO system. Begun in
1960 at the University of Illinois and later commercialized by
CDC, PLATO (Programmed Logic for Automatic Teaching

                                   60
                      The Need for Workstations
Operations) was the first generalized computer-assisted in-
struction system. By the 1970s, PLATO ran on CDC's Cyber
minicomputers and supported a vast network of graphical ter-
minals that featured innovations like touch screens, interactive
graphics, online chat rooms, instant messaging, and multiplay-
er games. At its peak, PLATO had thousands of terminals
worldwide and served over a million users, foreshadowing
many aspects of today's internet.
    The history of PLATO is deeply interesting and if you’re
so inclined, you might pick up a copy of “The Friendly Orange
Glow” by Brian Dear, who tells the story of this trailblazing
system in an engaging and entertaining fashion.
    Early minicomputers had a variety of word sizes and ar-
chitectures, but by the early 1970s, the 16-bit word length be-
came standard, led by systems like the Data General Nova and
DEC PDP-11. Popular operating systems included DEC's
OS/8 and RSTS-11. Minicomputers found widespread use
in manufacturing process control, telephone switching, lab-
oratory automation, engineering, business, and time sharing
services. They were the engines behind the rise of new applica-
tions like computer-aided design (CAD).
    The introduction of integrated circuits allowed minicom-
puters to get smaller, less expensive, and more capable through-
out the 1970s. The VAX superminicomputer introduced by
DEC in 1977 took minicomputers into the 32-bit age and
cemented DEC's position as the minicomputer performance
leader into the 1980s.
    Even as minicomputers reached their peak, the seeds of
their disruption were already being planted. Technology never

                                61
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

rests. Microcomputers based on single-chip microprocessors
were becoming more powerful, culminating in 32-bit RISC
chips that rivaled minicomputer CPUs. We'll be discussing
more on RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computing) versus
CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computing) in a later chap-
ter. Simultaneously, UNIX workstations were emerging as a
new class of powerful interactive computers for engineering
and scientific applications. Minicomputer companies strug-
gled to adapt, and by the 1990s, most had gone out of business,
merged, or exited the computer industry. Control Data exited
the hardware business in 1989 after several years of losses.
    While minicomputers no longer exist as a distinct category,
what they contributed to our world in their capacity as “serious
machines”, lives on. Many of the technologies and concepts
the minicomputer pioneers like DEC and CDC introduced—
interactive computing, graphical user interfaces, comput-
er-assisted instruction, embedded systems, RISC, distributed
processing, virtual memory—are foundations of modern com-
puting. And many of the pioneers who cut their teeth on mi-
cros went on to make great contributions to workstations and
PCs. One prime example being Dave Cutler, the designer of
the VMS operating system. Cutler worked at DEC for many
years and was later recruited to Microsoft by Bill Gates to
write Windows NT. The core of today’s Windows is still based
on the code base developed by Cutler and his team. So, in a
sense, if you use a Windows computer, you are benefiting from
the innovations made during the minicomputer era.




                              62
                      The Need for Workstations

The Birth of Workstations
As technology continued to advance, engineers
tried to address these shortcomings in mainframes by de-
signing machines that would bring the power of a multi-us-
er system to an individual operator. The operator could use
all the power. They would completely control the processor,
memory, storage, and graphics capabilities. There was no
need to share these with others. It was a machine with com-
puting power comparable to a mainframe, but it was individ-
ualized. From these ideas, the modern workstation computer
was born!
    Workstations built by early computer manufacturers were
not cheap. One of the first, the IBM 1620, built in 1959, had a
starting price around $85,000! But they were small, relatively
more cost-effective than mainframes (which could cost in the
millions of dollars), and delivered more power to individual
users than they would otherwise get by sharing a larger ma-
chine. Workstations were able to run their own operating sys-
tem and generally did not require an extensive technical staff
to operate, largely freeing individual users from the constraints
imposed by central IT teams. The freedom that workstations
enabled for serious computer users marked the beginning of
the end for the mainframe as the dominant force in commer-
cial computing.




                               63
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




An IBM 1620 on display at the Seattle World's Fair in 1962. Photo cred-
 it: Roger Dudley, IMLS Digital Collections & Content, CC BY 2.0


                                  64
                     The Need for Workstations


    The introduction of workstations, along with advances in
technology and the development of new networking protocols,
also paved the way for other types of innovation. Now that
each computer had its own processor and significant memo-
ry resources, the idea of pooling these resources in an ad hoc
way could be explored. The idea of “distributed” computing
environments surfaced to explore how to effectively and seam-
lessly pool resources across a network populated with powerful
workstations.
    In 1964 at MIT, the research project Multics, which stood
for MULTiplexed Information and Computing Service, was
first started. The idea was to have a mainframe time-sharing
operating system. Because of its many novel ideas, it had a
massive influence on all major operating systems since, from
mainframes to minicomputers.
    Among these novel ideas was single-level memory, where
all of a computer’s memory consisted of segments or objects
which were mapped into the memory’s address space. This
term is now usually called virtual memory. Another novel idea
of Multics was dynamic linking, which is when linking is done
while a program is being loaded or while running, as opposed
to being done when the executable file is created. And for its
organizational claim to fame, Multics was the first operating
system with a hierarchical file structure.




                              65
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




An iron-on patch with the MULTICS logo. Photo credit: Ron Riedesel,
                             Fair use


     Originally, Bell Labs was one of the supporters and con-
tributors to Multics, but they stepped away from the project
in 1969. That said, Bell Labs was far from done with operating
systems.
     The Unix operating system was developed at AT&T
Bell Labs by computer scientists Ken Thompson and Den-
nis Ritchie in 1969. The name Unix, originally Unics, was a
riff on Multics, the prior operating system Bell Labs and pro-
grammers Thompson and Ritchie had been a part of. Current
belief is that the “U” stood for uniplex as opposed to multi-
plexed. Though Unix had similarities to Multics, including the
hierarchical file structure and the names of some commands,

                                66
                     The Need for Workstations
the internal design of Unix was different. Whereas Multics
was highly complex and designed for larger computers and
mainframes, Unix took a more simplistic and straightforward
approach and was designed for smaller computers, namely
workstations.




           The UNIX logo. Photo credit: Public domain


    Unix played a major role in realizing “distributed” comput-
ing environments, allowing for the sharing of resources and
data between workstations, further increasing the efficiency
and power available to workstation users.
    In distributed computing, an entirely new paradigm was
born, and it led to a vast range of questions. How should fail-
ure be tolerated in such environments? What assumptions
should one machine make of another when sending it a re-
quest for some resources? In what manner should machines
be discovered? How should machines that are on the network
for a brief period of time participate in the distributed en-
vironment? With what processes should authentication and
security be managed?




                              67
                      SERIOUS MACHINES




Early versions of UNIX ran on the DEC PDP-11 computers. Photo
            credit: Stefan_Kögl. Wikipedia, CC BY-SA 3.0




                             68
                     The Need for Workstations
     These pivotal research questions were encountered and
answered over many years and made distributed computing a
lively and meaningful area of inquiry. The way many comput-
er scientists began to think of the network changed. It wasn’t
just a medium of communication; it had become a medium of
computation. This idea was best expressed by Sun Microsys-
tems slogan, “The Network is the Computer.”
     Though the era of workstations and distributed computing
was dawning, mainframes didn’t disappear. Even today, while
it is true that mainframes are no longer the primary type of
serious computer used in commercial environments, they do
continue to play an important role in certain industries. Bank-
ing is a great example of where mainframes are still used. Ev-
ery day, banks have an enormous number of transactions, from
everything like ATM withdrawals to credit card charges. If
you’ve ever had a fraudulent credit card charge flagged, that’s
a mainframe helping you out. Insurance is another area where
mainframes are used to crunch the data required to assess risks
and set prices. When your auto insurance rates go up, blame
it on a mainframe. The government is another primary user of
mainframes. When the IRS checks your taxes and you don’t
get audited, you can thank a mainframe. When the Nation-
al Weather Service analyzes atmospheric conditions and lets
you know that yes, in fact, Saturday will be a perfect day for
golf, again, you can thank a mainframe. But before you think
it’s always going to be this way, remember that technology is
constantly changing.




                              69
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




Mainframes today look sleek. A single-frame IBM z15 mainframe. Photo
            credit: Agiorgio, Wikipedia, CC BY-SA 4.0




                                70
                      The Need for Workstations
     Online retail giant, Amazon, is taking a stab at doing away
with the need for mainframes. AWS (Amazon Web Services)
has a new service called Mainframe Modernization that allows
businesses to unload some of their required computing to the
cloud. Will mainframes disappear completely? Not anytime
soon, but in a future where technology is constantly advanc-
ing, anything is possible. Some would argue that with cloud
computing, the pendulum is swinging back towards autocratic
centralization, but that is a story for another day.
     For those who didn’t need the computing power of main-
frames, the introduction of the workstation and the develop-
ment of distributed computing greatly expanded commercial
computing and made it possible for businesses and individuals
to access powerful computer systems at a fraction of the cost of
a mainframe. As traditional, purpose-built workstations made
way for x86 based systems, this decentralization and distribu-
tion of processing capability still very much remains true.
     Drawing that all together, the dawn of commercial com-
puting with mainframes was a significant moment in the
history of computing. It marked the beginning of a new era
in which computers were no longer just for scientists and re-
searchers, but were also accessible to businesses and individ-
uals. The introduction of time-sharing, terminals, and work-
stations expanded the capabilities of computer systems and
greatly improved the user experience. And the development of
new technologies and networking protocols further expanded
the capabilities of commercial computing and paved the way
for the creation of distributed computing environments. Now
let’s see where those workstations took us.

                                71
The Dawn of the
Workstation Age
The first message ever sent on
ARPANET on October 29, 1969. Public
Domain.
                  The Dawn of the Workstation Age




The first widely distributed workstations were
developed in the 1970s and 80s by companies such as Xe-
rox, Sun Microsystems, HP, Apollo, IBM, DEC, and Silicon
Graphics. These machines were smaller and more affordable
than mainframes and minicomputers, making them acces-
sible to a wide range of users. In addition, they featured ad-
vanced graphics capabilities—allowing for the creation of
detailed images and animations—substantial local storage,
and the ability to run multiple tasks at once.
     The impact of the workstation on engineering and science
was significant. Engineers and scientists could now perform
complex calculations and simulations that were once impos-
sible. This allowed for more accurate predictions and designs
and led to a new era of innovation in many fields. But be-
fore we dive into modern workstations such as SGI and Sun,
let’s take a look at how they leveraged many of the graphics,
networking, and user interface ideas that had previously been
developed.




                              75
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

The Birth of Networks
Did Al Gore really invent the Internet? And when
was the concept of the Internet first conceived? The 1980s?
1970s? If you’re thinking it’s earlier, then you’re right. Back
in the early 1960s, the director of the Information Processing
Techniques Office (IPTO), J.C.R. Licklider, came up with
the idea of the Intergalactic Computer Network (IGCN).
The concept behind this term right out of science-fiction was
to develop an “electronic commons open to all” where infor-
mation could be available and shared between governments,
institutions, companies, and individuals. This formed the ba-
sis for today’s Internet.
    Though the Intergalactic Computer Network never be-
came a reality at the time, the work did offer important con-
tributions to the future of networking. First, Licklider helped
create computer science departments at major universities.
And second, the ideas of time-sharing and computer network-
ing were formed, ready to take over the world.




                              76
                     The Dawn of the Workstation Age




Visualization of Internet routing paths. Photo credit: The Opte Project,
                        Wikipedia, CC BY 2.5




                                  77
                      SERIOUS MACHINES

The Mother of all Demos
Take yourself back to the year 1968. NASA’s Apol-
lo 8 orbited the moon. Star Trek was bringing aliens to our
television screens. And Douglas Engelbart, a computer engi-
neer at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI), was about to
change the way we interacted with computers.
    On December 9th, Engelbart and his team at SRI, the
Augmentation Research Center (ARC), gave a demonstra-
tion of the work they had been doing on a new way to in-
teract with computers. They had developed a new complete
hardware and software system, called the oN-Line System (or
NLS for short). This would later be known as “The Mother of
All Demos.” This 90-minute demonstration showcased a wide
range of never-seen-before technologies, including the mouse,
windows-based graphical user interface, hypertext, and video-
conferencing. With his system, he aimed to show that com-
puters were not just for computing but were equally valuable
(if not more so) for communication and information retrieval.
He was trying to turn the idea of Vannevar Bush’s memex ma-
chine into reality.




                             78
                    The Dawn of the Workstation Age




Douglas Engelbart practicing for what would become known as The
Mother of all Demos. Photo credit: SRI International, Wikipedia, CC
                            BY-SA 3.0


    Engelbart’s demonstration was unprecedented in that it
showed an entirely new way to interact with computers, vast-
ly different from the command-line interface commonly used
at the time. He was trying to augment human intelligence
with his new design. The demonstration showed how using a
mouse, windows, and other graphical elements could greatly
improve the usability and efficiency of computers. This new
way of interacting with computers would become the foun-
dation of modern computer interfaces and would go on to in-
spire greats like Steve Jobs and Bill Gates.




                                79
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




The First Prototype of a Computer Mouse, as designed by Bill English
from Douglas Engelbart's sketches. Photo credit: SRI International, CC
                             BY-SA 3.0


    One of the most notable aspects of the demonstration was
the use of remote computing. Via a modem running at 1200
baud—fast for the time—Engelbart controlled a computer at
SRI’s Menlo Park headquarters from a location miles away at
the San Francisco civic auditorium via a leased line—a private
telecommunications circuit between two or more locations.
This was the first example of remote computing, and it was a
significant step forward in the development of networks and
the Internet. Remote computing also later became a corner-
stone of the Unix window-based environment X-Windows,
developed at MIT.
    Also notable was that this demonstration showcased the
first use of a mouse, which would later become a standard
input device for computers. Using a video projector, the en-
tire demonstration, including the use of the mouse and the

                                 80
                  The Dawn of the Workstation Age
windows-based graphical user interface, was viewable to the
audience on a large screen.
    Expectation collided with reality. Before this “Mother of
all Demos,” many in the computer science community thought
Douglas Engelbart to be a “crackpot.” Not so after “The Demo.”
Everyone was blown away, and this demo became one of the
most important moments in computer history. In 2015, it was
even commemorated in a musical theater presentation at Bing
Concert Hall at Stanford University titled “The Demo,” which
recreated the momentous event on stage with music.


ARPANET
The use of remote computing in Engelbart’s
demonstration was a significant step forward in the devel-
opment of networks and the Internet. The demonstration
showed that computers could be connected and controlled
remotely, which was a revolutionary concept at the time. This
technology was further developed in the years following the
demonstration, leading to the creation of networks that con-
nected computers and allowed for the sharing of data and
resources. This would play an important role in the develop-
ment of the workstation computer.
   Let’s look back to the Information Processing Techniques
Office, which was part of the Advanced Research Projects
Agency (ARPA). Though the Intergalactic Computer Net-
work never did materialize, the work within the organization
on computer networking continued, and ARPA was a key
player in the development of modern networking technology.

                              81
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

   Funded by the US government and part of the Depart-
ment of Defense, Advanced Research Projects Agency Net-
work (ARPANET) was established in 1966 with the goal of
developing and testing new networking technologies. One of
the key figures in the development of ARPANET was Bob
Taylor. As the head of the Information Processing Techniques
Office at the Pentagon’s Advanced Research Projects Agency,
Taylor was responsible for overseeing the development of the
ARPANET project, which was created on the ideas of the for-
mer Intergalactic Computer Network project.




ARPANET access points in the 1970s. Photo credit: Semaforo GMS,
                        CC BY-SA 4.0


    One of the most important contributions of ARPANET
(renamed to DARPANET for Defense ARPANET in 1972)
was the development of the first operational packet-switching
network, allowing small pieces of data to be transferred across
a network. It should be noted that this was not the dawn of
computer communications. Before this, timeshare terminals

                              82
                   The Dawn of the Workstation Age
were communicating with mainframe and minicomputers via
high speed analog leased and dial telephone lines using high-
speed models operating at 4800, 9600, and 14,400 Kbps (and
more). Traffic from multiple terminals could be combined us-
ing multiplexers and finally statistical multiplexers permitting
many devices to be connected to mainframes and minis at
once. Packet switching was a refinement of these multiplexing
schemes.
    This protocol developed by ARPANET, known as the 1822
protocol, though successful in part, was not without issues. As
networks were developed, new protocols were also created to
ensure that data could be transmitted and received reliably.
One of the most important protocols developed during this
time was the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Proto-
col (TCP/IP), which is still in use today as the foundation of
the Internet. This protocol was developed by Vint Cerf and
Bob Kahn, who worked at the ARPANET at the time.
    So how did all that turn into the Internet? The ARPANET
was the first operational packet-switching network, and its
success led to the development of other packet-switching
networks, such as the National Physical Laboratory Network
(NPL) in the UK and the Cyclades network in France. These
networks were connected to ARPANET in the 1970s, and the
resulting network of networks was known as the Internet.
    The impact of ARPANET cannot be overstated, and its
legacy continues to shape the way we communicate and access
information today, both in good ways and in bad. Being the
first networking system, the opportunity for misuse quickly
appeared. Leonard Kleinrock, an American computer scientist

                               83
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

best known for his work on queuing theory, holds the dubious
honor of committing the first illegal act on the Internet. No,
it wasn’t a scam to send money to a Nigerian bank account.
It was a request for an electric razor to be returned! In 1973,
after a meeting in England, Kleinrock sent a message on AR-
PANET from the United States to England asking that his
razor be returned. But because ARPANET was funded by the
government, there were strict rules in place. It was not to be
used for personal reasons. Did the razor ever get returned?
That’s a good question for Kleinrock.




  ARPANET Logical Map from 1973. Photo credit: Public domain



                              84
                    The Dawn of the Workstation Age
    ARPANET also holds the honor of facilitating the first
mass email. In 1978, Gary Thuerk of DEC sent an email via
ARPANET to 400 potential clients. Did it work? He claimed
that it resulted in $13 million in sales for DEC. It seems mass
email marketing does work, or at least it did back in 1978.
    So how does Al Gore and his claim to have invented the
Internet tie into all this? In 1988, while Al Gore was a sena-
tor, a concept for a National Research Network was presented
to congress, chaired by none other than Leonard Kleinrock
(of electric razor fame). Al Gore went on to create “The Gore
Bill,” officially known as the High Performance Computing
and Communication Act of 1991. The bill was passed in 1991
and led to the creation of the National Information Infrastruc-
ture, or more commonly known as the information superhigh-
way. So, no, Al Gore did not invent the Internet, but he was
involved in the whole process.
    Though officially terminated in 1990, ARPANET contin-
ues to hold a fond place in pop culture, especially as a system to
be hacked, including being featured in episodes of The X-Files,
The Americans, and Person of Interest.


The Alto
The Mother of all Demos in 1968, care of Douglas
Engelbart, was the catapult that influenced all computers go-
ing forward. One such computer it influenced was the Xerox
Alto, a revolutionary machine that was developed at Xerox
PARC (Palo Alto Research Center) in the 1970s. It was the
first computer to feature a graphical user interface (GUI), an

                                85
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

Ethernet network capability, a laser printer peripheral, and
a mouse. The Xerox Alto was much more than just another
computer. It was the first practical workstation and laid the
foundation for two industries: scientific workstations and us-
er-friendly personal computers.




       The Xerox Alto computer. Photo credit: Public domain


                               86
                   The Dawn of the Workstation Age
    The Xerox Alto, designed mostly by Charles Thacker, was
a complete system built for the purpose of conducting re-
search and development in the field of computer science. It
was equipped with a powerful processor, a large amount of
memory, and a high-resolution display. This made it possible
for users to perform complex tasks such as graphical design,
scientific simulations, and even programming. In addition, be-
ing the first computer to have a built-in Ethernet network, the
Alto made it straightforward for users to share resources and
collaborate on projects.
    The Xerox Alto’s GUI was revolutionary at the time, al-
lowing users to easily navigate and interact with the computer.
The mouse, which was developed at PARC, provided a more
intuitive way to interact with the computer than the tradition-
al keyboard and command-line interface. Unlike the mouse
designs following, the Alto mouse featured three buttons. Also
available as a peripheral, was a 5-key corded keyboard, though
it never caught on or gained the popularity of the mouse. The
GUI also made it possible for multiple users to access the com-
puter at the same time, which was a significant improvement
over the single-user systems that existed at the time.




                               87
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




The Xerox Alto Keyset, a chorded keyboard, never caught on. Photo cred-
                 it: Vincent Lextrait, CC BY-SA 4.0


    The Xerox Alto was also the first computer to feature the
“WYSIWYG” (What You See Is What You Get) principle,
which made it possible for users to see the final document
layout while they were working on it. This was a significant
improvement over the traditional method of creating docu-
ments, which required users to enter code to format text and
images, much like coding html to create websites. The WYSI-
WYG principle would later be used in many other software
applications, such as word processors and desktop publishing
programs.

                                  88
                   The Dawn of the Workstation Age
     The legendary team that worked on the Alto included Bob
Metcalfe and Alan Kay. Bob Metcalfe was the principal in-
ventor of Ethernet and later went on to become a co-founder
of 3Com. He received the million-dollar Turing award for
his work on Ethernet. Alan Kay, also a brilliant Turing-award
winning computer scientist, conceptualized the DynaBook
and wrote the Smalltalk object-oriented language.
     Any good system needs a good text editor, and for the Alto,
a text editor named Bravo was created. Bravo was what was
considered a modal editor. Characters that were typed on the
keyboard were mostly commands to the machine. Only when
the editor was put into “insert” or “append” mode were new
characters added to the text file. Bravo was the first WYSI-
WYG modal editor, but it was not the first modal editor, nor
was it the last. For those familiar with vi, a popular text editor
created for Unix systems, creator Bill Joy admits to being heav-
ily influenced (as in “surreptitiously looked at and copied”) by
Bravo when coming up with the command system for vi. Fun-
nily enough, one of the best-selling points for modal editors
like Bravo and vi is that you don’t need a mouse. Everything
can be done at the keyboard.
     Despite its many innovations, the Xerox Alto was not a
commercial success. The high cost of fabricating the computer
($12,000 back then, making it a bit out of budget for the av-
erage personal computer user) and the lack of software appli-
cations were two major factors that contributed to its failure.
But perhaps the most major reason was the attitude of the
Xerox senior management towards the Alto. After all, it wasn’t
a photocopier, so how essential could it be!?

                               89
                           SERIOUS MACHINES

    Even though Xerox leadership didn’t see it at the time, the
Xerox Alto was a trendsetter ahead of its time. It had a sig-
nificant influence on the development of personal computers
and workstations that followed, and many of the hardware ca-
pabilities and software features that were developed for the
Xerox Alto would later become standard features on almost all
computers.




Influenced by the Xerox Alto, the Lilith machine was a custom-built
workstation which came out from ETH Zurich in 1980 with a price tag
of $8000. The team was lead by Niklaus Wirth who went on to design
several programming languages, including Pascal. Lilith's mouse was cus-
tom designed and went on to inspire the first mice produced by Logitech.
                        Photo credit: Fair use




                                  90
                     The Dawn of the Workstation Age




The Osborne 1 Portable Personal Computer (1981) was largely based
on the Xerox NoteTaker (1978). The introductory price for the machine
was $1795. Photo credit: Photographer: Tomislav Medak from Flickr /
               Editing: Bill Bertram, CC BY-SA 3.0




                                 91
PART 2
What Makes
A Workstation?
The Three Ms:
The Vision for
a Workstation
Original Doom cover art. Games like
Doom were possible thanks to the power
of workstations. Fair use.
               The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation




The vision for the workstation was now in place.
Users needed a computer with the capabilities promised
by such a machine. But how was that vision defined? For a
workstation, that vision was focused on three key metrics:
Megapixels, MIPS, and Megabytes of RAM. These metrics
were used to measure the performance and capabilities of
workstations and were important factors in the development
of new workstation technology.


Megapixels
The evolution of displays was a key aspect of the
workstation revolution, with the goal being to produce
high-resolution, high-quality images. For those who can re-
member, early computer monitors may have bragged about
having 160 x 200 pixels (32,000 pixels) or 640 x 200 (128,000
pixels). Keeping in mind that one megapixel is about a mil-
lion pixels, these early display sizes, though revolutionary for
the time, weren’t even close. But as processors became faster,
display resolution grew as well. This led to the development
of the NeXTstation, which was one of the first workstations

                                 97
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

to feature a 1 megapixel display. The 17-inch monitor fea-
tured a display of 1120 x 832 and had four brightness levels
(black, dark gray, light gray, and white). Yes, do the math. A
resolution of 1120 x 832 is only 931,840 pixels, not quite a
true megapixel but close enough to claim bragging rights.
And for the avid computer fanatic who wanted to bring one
of these high-tech devices home, the NeXT MegaPixel Dis-
play cost around $995 at the time (equivalent to over $2000
today). For those who wanted it in color, the NeXT Color
Display was $2995 at the time (over $6400 in today’s money).




The NeXT MegaPixel Display, sitting on top of a NeXTstation with the
original keyboard & mouse. Photo credit: Alexander Schaelss, CC BY-
                              SA 3.0

                                98
                The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation
    How has that resolution changed? As a comparison, a typ-
ical Full HD computer screen these days comes in at 1920 x
1080 (2 megapixels). 4K Ultra HD puts that to shame with
a resolution at 3840 x 2160 (8 megapixels). Also great is that
computer monitors these days won’t break the bank. You can
bring home a pretty amazing monitor for just a couple hun-
dred dollars.




The Dell Ultrasharp UP3218K 31.5 inch monitor has a display resolution
               of 7680x4320 Pixels Photo credit: Fair use




                                  99
                      SERIOUS MACHINES

MIPS
The next metric for defining the performance
and capability of a workstation was MIPS, or millions of in-
structions per second. To put this simply, what this defined
was the number of instructions a CPU could process in one
second and, in some sense, was the raw computational capac-
ity of the computer. The total performance of a computer is
dependent on other factors, such as the speed and capacity of
storage, input and output speed, and how much memory it
has. In addition, depending on the type of processor, an op-
eration like multiplication might take a large number of in-
structions, so the MIPS measurement alone may not always
be accurate as the sole determinant of performance.
    MIPS values, like everything, have evolved over the life-
time of computers. Keep in mind that initial computer speeds
were not measured in MIPS. They were measured in kIPS
(kilo instructions per second), also known as TIPS (thousand
instructions per second). In 1951, the UNIVAC 1 clocked in
at 0.002 MIPS with a processor speed of 2.25 MHz. That’s
2000 instructions per second.
    Fast forward ten years to 1961. The IBM 7030 (known as
“Stretch”) was IBM’s first transistorized supercomputer and
beat the million mark, coming in at 1.200 MIPS with a pro-
cessor speed of 3.30 MHz. In 1975, the Cray 1 came in at a
whopping 160.0 MIPS with a processor speed of 80.00 MHz.
And sure, these are supercomputers. What about computers
for the average user? Well, in 1979, Motorola came out with
the Motorola 68000, which became a popular chip used in

                            100
               The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation
personal computers of the time, including some Macintosh,
Amiga, and Atari computers. The Motorola 68000 clocked in
at 1.400 MIPS with a processor speed of 8.000 MHz. Even
today, the architecture is still in use!




    The IBM 7030 Stretch. Photo credit: Rama, CC BY-SA 3.0 fr


   Workstations needed speed to compete in the marketplace.
The MIPS metric was used to measure the computing power of
workstations and was an important factor in the development

                                101
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

of new hardware. The MIPS measure was used to compare
the performance of RISC and CISC architectures and played
a role in the development of the RISC-based Sun computer,
which we’ll talk more about in a bit.
    So what are MIPS values today? How far have we gotten?
Hold on to your hats. The top contenders are always changing,
but as of the writing of this book, it’s a lot and constantly in-
creasing, so much so that TIPS has taken on a new meaning.
Whereas it used to be thousand instruction per second, TIPS
now refers to tera (or trillion) instructions per second!


Megabytes of RAM
The final metric in defining the performance and
capability of a workstation was megabytes of RAM. RAM
got its start back in 1965 when IBM’s SP95 chip had 16 bits
of SRAM. Read that again. That’s bits. We’re nowhere close
to megabytes. As a reminder, a megabyte is about one million
bytes. A byte is eight bits. The IBM SP95, with its 16 bits—
that was 2 bytes of memory. But technology was moving
ahead swiftly. Ten years later, in 1975, Intel came out with
chips with 16 kbits of DRAM (that’s 2 kilobytes). We’re still
not close to a megabyte, but we’re getting there. So, when did
we reach the megabyte threshold? In 1984, Hitachi came out
with a chip boosting 8 Mbits of DRAM. That’s the 1 Mbyte
number we’re looking for. From there, it was game on, with
many companies jumping into the memory chip market.




                              102
                  The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation




The IBM SP95 with 16 bits of memory. This particular picture shows a
version of the chip with 64 bits, and it is pictured atop the older style of
hand-woven core memory, where each ring represents a single bit of stor-
         age capacity. Photo credit: Steve Jurvetson, CC BY 2.0


    The development of these larger and faster types of RAM
was an important aspect of the workstation revolution. When
workstations finally had a megabyte of RAM, it greatly im-
proved their ability to solve more serious problems. As the
speed of RAM chips increased, so did the overall performance
of the systems that used them. But memory was expensive and
was one of the key factors in the price of a machine. Sure, more
memory meant the workstation would run faster, but it would
also cost more.

                                    103
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

    Lucky for the consumer, the cost of RAM has dropped
significantly, making it possible to have much larger amounts
of RAM in today’s computers. Whereas back then, a sin-
gle megabyte of RAM was considered a lot, workstations
now may reach into the gigabytes and terabytes. Even your
cell phone—and not even the high-end model—could have
around 8 Gbytes of RAM.
    Memory is a funny thing. It seems like the more we get,
the more we need. And when memory starts to fail us…well, I
forgot what I was going to say. So onward we go.




The Kaypro II, which was designed to be a portable computer, like the
Osborne, came out in 1982 and had 64 KB of RAM. The computer re-
            tailed for $1595. Photo credit: Amir Husain




                                104
               The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation

Graphics Revolutionized
Okay, it’s not one of the three Ms, but there’s one
more important aspect of workstations that needs to be men-
tioned. One of those three Ms was the megapixel. Megapix-
els have to do with the resolution of the computer screen,
and that’s important for sure. After all, though the 8-bit,
highly pixelized style of art is a retro fad, no one wants to
actually see individual pixels these days. But we need to note
that resolution is not the only aspect of graphics capabili-
ty that matters. Graphics hardware is responsible for much
more. For example, you might have high resolution, but each
image could take very long to render on screen. That would
be—and is—frustrating! In order to have amazing graphics
capabilities, you need both a high frame rate, and high res-
olution. Blurry Netflix? Not cool. Super slow Netflix where
the screen tears and the video starts to look like a slideshow?
Also not cool. So you need them both, resolution and high
frame rates. Today’s Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) and
high-resolution displays provide both.




                                105
                        SERIOUS MACHINES




A Commodore Amiga 500 in the author's collection, complete with
     Commodore's 1084S monitor. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    Early graphics opened up a part of the human brain not yet
tapped, but it didn’t take humans long to see the possibilities.
Back in 1958, one of the first interactive video games was cre-
ated by William Higinbotham and the Brookhaven National
Laboratory. The game, Tennis for Two, ran on an oscilloscope
and simulated a tennis match. The graphics consisted of a hor-
izontal line, which was the tennis court, and a short vertical
line, which was the tennis net. A point of light represented
the ball, and the goal was to hit it over the net without having
it go out of bounds. Fast forward to the 1960s when the term
“computer graphics” was coined by either William Fetter or

                              106
                 The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation

Verne Hudson, both at Boeing. We already talked about Steve
Russel’s Spacewar! which ran on the PDP-1, but what’s inter-
esting is that it became the official diagnostic program for ev-
ery new machine shipped. It also claimed credit as the world’s
first video game, because no one remembered Tennis for Two
or the bouncing ball program that ran on Whirlwind.

https://www.retrogamedeconstructionzone.com/2021/08/
the-tennis-for-two-simulator-tets.html




Tennis for Two as viewed on an oscilloscope. Photo credit: Public domain


                                  107
                          SERIOUS MACHINES

    Soon, major corporations began to see the potential in
computer graphics. Who can forget one of the earliest video
arcade games, Pong, released in 1972 by Atari? But computer
graphics weren’t solely for video games. People began to see
computers as a tool that could be used for animation. The Utah
teapot, first created in 1975, became the gold standard when
it came to testing 3D modeling on a computer. It’s still being
used today.




 A raytraced rendering of the Utah teapot. Photo credit: Public domain




                                 108
                The Three Ms: The Vision for a Workstation
    The 1980s brought a revolution in computer graphics. Vid-
eo games became more realistic, movies began incorporating
CGI as special effects. Even Dire Straits, with their popular
Money for Nothing music video, which was fully CGI, showed
the potential of computer graphics to music fans worldwide.
In the 1990s, Pixar took over the animated movie scene with
Toy Story, which was released in 1995. Animation would nev-
er be the same. Castle Wolfenstein, originally released in 1981
with limited graphics, was bought by id Software and rebrand-
ed as Wolfenstein 3D. Considered revolutionary for its time, it’s
considered the “grandfather of 3D shooters.”




    Early graphics from Castle Wolfenstein. Photo credit: Fair use


    Computer graphics continue to improve. It’s often hard to
distinguish the real from the computer generated these days.
CG can be used to replace the faces on characters in movies
when the actors or actresses die. It’s not always perfect. Take,
for example, Princess Leia in Star Wars. When it came time
for The Rise of Skywalker, Carrie Fisher had died, causing fans
to mourn worldwide. It also caused the movie producers to

                                 109
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

scamper about, trying to figure out what to do. But director
J.J. Abrams came up with a solution. He was able to use prior
footage to make enough of the story follow through. In gen-
eral, no CG was required to render Princess Leia. But for the
cameo of Princess Leia in Rogue One, the producers didn’t play
it quite so smart. Instead, CG was used to take a 1980s Carrie
Fisher and paste it onto a double’s face. With her glossy skin
and buggy eyes, anyone knows from first glance that some-
thing is off. However, as computer graphics continue to im-
prove, maybe the biggest question is: Will graphics replace ac-
tors in the future? That sounds like an episode of Black Mirror.
     As for workstations, the topic of our book, the develop-
ment of graphics technology was an important aspect of the
workstation revolution. The use of graphics greatly improved
the usability and efficiency of computers, making it possible
to represent data in a more intuitive and visual way. Now, let’s
continue with our story.




                              110
Networking
Workstations
10BASE5 vampire tap Medium
Attachment Unit (transceiver). Photo
credit: Alistair1978 CC BY-SA 2.5.
                     Networking Workstations




The Networking Wars
Workstation networking options have evolved
significantly since the invention of the Ethernet in the
1970s. The first version of the Ethernet was invented by a
team made up of Bob Metcalfe, David Boggs, Butler Lamp-
son, and Chuck Thacker. As a reminder, Bob Metcalfe was a
member of the legendary team who worked on the Alto at
the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. He led Ethernet in-
vention, standardization, and commercialization.
    An aside, Bob is an amazing person and good friend of
mine. I worked with him at a company I founded, SparkCog-
nition, where he served as an advisor and a research fellow. I
definitely learned a lot from his unique view of connectivity.
He has an amazing talk on this subject which you can find on
YouTube.
    The first commercially available Ethernet was called
10BASE5 and had a coaxial cable that was about half an
inch in diameter and very stiff, making it hard to work with.
It was soon followed by the 10BASE2 standard, which had
a much more flexible cable and was about half the diameter

                             115
                           SERIOUS MACHINES

of its predecessor. It still used the same thick coaxial tech-
nology. These early Ethernet versions were soon replaced by
the 10BASE-T, provided a data transfer rate of 10Mbps and
utilized a thin twisted-pair coaxial cable. This early version of
Ethernet was primarily used in local area networks (LANs)
and was the first widely adopted networking technology for
workstations.




Here’s a picture of the principal inventor of Ethernet, Bob Metcalfe, with
a copy of my first book, The Sentient Machine. Image credit: Amir Husain

                                   116
                      Networking Workstations
    However, the 1980s saw the emergence of the “networking
wars” between different technologies and vendors. Token Ring,
developed by IBM, was a rival to Ethernet. Novell and Mic-
rosoft also developed their own networking protocols. DEC
came out with DECnet, its own protocol, which became one
of the first peer-to-peer network architectures. These compet-
ing technologies created a confusing and fragmented market,
making it difficult for customers to choose the right option for
their needs.
    In the end, TCP/IP running on top of Ethernet emerged
as the winner. As you may recall, TCP/IP is a protocol suite
that was developed by the US Department of Defense’s Ad-
vanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) and is the foun-
dation of the Internet. It is a set of communications protocols
that provide a common language for computers to communi-
cate with each other. The widespread adoption of TCP/IP was
a key factor in the development of the modern Internet, and it
continues to be the dominant networking protocol today.
    But even with the acceptance of Ethernet, the compe-
tition was not ready to give up. In the late 1990s and early
2000s, Infiniband emerged as a new networking technology
for workstations. Infiniband was a high-performance, low-la-
tency interconnect that was designed for use in data centers
and high-performance computing (HPC) environments. It
provided a data transfer rate of up to 56 Gbps and was capable
of handling large amounts of data with low latency.
    Infiniband was particularly useful for scientific and engi-
neering applications that required large amounts of data to be
processed in real-time, such as weather modeling, oil and gas

                              117
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

exploration, and genetic research.
    In recent years, there has been a growing demand for higher
data transfer rates, as well as the need to handle large amounts
of data. This has led to the development of 10 and 100 Gbps
networking systems, which offer faster data transfer rates and
more bandwidth. These systems are particularly useful for ap-
plications such as big data analytics, machine learning, and
high-resolution video streaming.
    Workstation networking options have evolved significantly
since the invention of Ethernet in the 1970s, but the evolution
of Ethernet has continued hand in hand. The fastest Ether-
net standard as of the publication of this book is 100 Gbps—
that’s one hundred gigabits per second. Compare that with the
2.94Mbps speed of the very first Ethernet system Metcalfe
led. Ethernet has become 34,000 times faster!


Workstations go to school
The MIT Athena project was a groundbreaking
initiative that aimed to create a distributed computing en-
vironment for the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) community. The name was suggested by the wife of
an MIT professor, after the Greek goddess of wisdom, Ath-
ena. The project was launched in 1983 and was one of the
earliest examples of a large-scale, campus-wide computing
system. The goal of the Athena project was to provide a cen-
tralized computing environment that would be accessible to
all members of the MIT community, regardless of their loca-
tion or the type of computer they were using.

                              118
                       Networking Workstations




    A diagram of the Athena project. Image credit: Public domain


    The technology used in the Athena project was based on
a distributed computing model, where multiple computers
were connected together in a network. The core of the system
was the Athena Cluster, which was a collection of powerful,
high-end workstations that were connected together using
the DECnet and TCP/IP protocols. These workstations were
based on the DEC VAX and Sun Microsystems Sun-3 archi-
tectures and were used for running the Athena software and
for providing computational resources to users.
    The Athena labs environment was designed to be us-
er-friendly and accessible to all members of the MIT com-
munity. Users could access the system from any location on
campus, either by logging in remotely or by using one of the
many Athena workstations that were located in various labs
and libraries around the campus. The system also provided
a wide range of software and services, including text editing
tools, programming languages, and email and file sharing
capabilities.

                                119
                       SERIOUS MACHINES




        The DEC VAX 11/780. Photo credit: Public domain


   One of the key features of the Athena project was the
use of a distributed file system developed by Carnegie Mel-
lon, known as the Andrew File System (AFS), named after
both Andrew Carnegie and Andrew Mellon, the namesakes
of Carnegie Mellon University. AFS was used to provide a
centralized file storage and retrieval system for the Athena

                              120
                      Networking Workstations
project. This allowed users to access their files and data from
any location on the network, regardless of the type of comput-
er they were using.
    The Athena project was led by a team of experts from the
MIT Laboratory for Computer Science (LCS) and the MIT
Information Systems (IS) department. Bob Metcalfe (of Xe-
rox Alto fame), who was a professor of electrical engineering
and computer science at MIT, was a lead donor for the project.
Metcalfe, the principal inventor of the Ethernet networking
technology, supported the Athena project as an MIT Alumnus
and Trustee. Other key members of the team included David J.
Farber, who was the chief scientist of the Athena project, and
Jerry Saltzer, who was the project’s lead architect.
    The Athena project was considered a major success and
had a profound impact on the field of computer science and
networking. The system served as a model for other univer-
sities and organizations that were looking to create similar
distributed computing environments. The Athena project also
served as a testbed for new technologies and ideas, such as
the use of distributed file systems and the concept of a cam-
pus-wide computing environment. The project was eventually
phased out in the late 1990s, but its legacy lives on in the many
technological advancements and innovations that it helped to
inspire.
    I remember visiting the MIT campus in early 1995, as a
teenager. A friend of mine got me into one of the Athena labs
which were filled with Sun workstations! I remember being
absolutely dazzled and amazed by the high resolution graphics
and the Mosaic web browser. More on that later.

                               121
PART 3
The Players
Sun
An ad used by SUN Microsystems upon
releasing Java into the development
world. Fair use.
                               Sun




Two Immigrants, a Programmer, and a Sales Guy
When we think workstations, we think Sun. Sun
Microsystems was a key player in the workstation revolution
and played a major role in the development of the modern
computer. The company was founded in 1982 by four indi-
viduals: Andy Bechtolsheim, Bill Joy, Scott McNealy, and
Vinod Khosla. Each of these individuals brought their own
unique skills and talents to the table, which helped to estab-
lish Sun as a major presence in the workstation industry.
    Sun’s origins can be traced back to the Stanford University
Network (SUN), a computer science research project at Stan-
ford University. Andy Bechtolsheim, an electrical engineering
graduate student, was the driving force behind the develop-
ment of the technology that would become the Sun comput-
er. He designed the original Sun workstation as a personal
CAD workstation around the Motorola 68000 microproces-
sor. The technology developed as part of this project was the
foundation for the Sun computer, which was designed to be a
high-performance workstation for engineering and scientific
applications. This technology was designed to be powerful and

                              127
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

flexible, making it ideal for use in a wide range of industries.
    Two other Stanford graduates soon joined Bechtolsheim,
and the three founded Sun Microsystems in 1982. A success-
ful company needs more than engineers behind the helm. It
needs someone who knows about the business side of things.
Scott McNealy filled that role. His undergraduate degree was
in economics, and he was earning an MBA at the Stanford
Graduate School of Business. At Sun, he was responsible for
the company’s marketing and sales efforts. He was a key figure
in the company’s early success, helping to build Sun’s reputa-
tion as a leading provider of high-performance workstations.
McNealy’s ability to connect with customers and to under-
stand their needs helped to establish Sun as a trusted brand in
the industry.




The SPARCstation IPX (codenamed Hobbes), enclosed in a lunchbox
     chassis, was released in July 1991. Photo credit: Amir Husain

                               128
                               Sun
    Projects of this scope also need financial backing, and Vi-
nod Khosla, an Indian-American venture capitalist, provided
the funding for the company. Twice rejected from the Stanford
Graduate School of Business due to lack of work experience, he
was finally accepted and earned his MBA. He raised $300,000
in seed capital money for Sun, and within five years, the com-
pany had annual sales of $1 billion. His investment helped to
fuel Sun’s rapid growth in the early years and helped to estab-
lish the company’s importance in the computer industry.
    What Sun needed now was someone who could build an
amazing operating system, and for that, they recruited Bill Joy,
a computer science graduate of UC Berkeley. Joy joined Sun
Microsystems and, though not there from day one, is consid-
ered one of the original founders. He was responsible for the
development of the Solaris operating system, which would
become one of the leading Unix-based operating systems. So-
laris was designed to be a robust, high-performance operating
system that could handle the demands of scientific and engi-
neering applications. It was also designed to be easy to use and
provided a wide range of features and tools that would make it
easier for users to get their work done.




                              129
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




A restored and fully functional SPARCstation 10 from the author's col-
lection. The SPARCstation 10 (codenamed Campus-2), enclosed in a
pizza box form factor, was announced in May 1992. Photo credit: Amir
                                 Husain

                                 130
                              Sun
    Bechtolsheim, the designer of the original CAD worksta-
tions back at Stanford, was responsible for the design and de-
velopment of the first official Sun workstations built around
the SPARC microprocessor. Unlike the Motorola 68000 series
processors which were originally used, this powerful processor
was designed specifically for use in high-performance work-
stations and was capable of handling complex, floating-point
calculations with ease.
    The company quickly scaled up, becoming one of the fast-
est-growing companies in the United States. Sun’s early suc-
cess was due in large part to its innovative technology, which
was designed to meet the needs of a wide range of customers.
The company’s products were used in many areas, including
science, engineering, finance, and government.
    However, despite its early success, Sun was not able to
dominate the market in the way it had hoped. The increasing
power of Intel processors and the emergence of Microsoft’s
Windows NT operating system made it difficult for Sun to
compete in the workstation market. In addition, when the
dot-com bubble burst, Sun was hit hard. They’d anticipated
plenty of business based on all those dot-com companies, and
when the companies went under, Sun stock tanked. As a result,
the company was forced to adapt and evolve in order to stay
competitive.
    Sun was able to remain relevant by continuing to innovate
and by focusing on new areas of growth. The company devel-
oped new products and services, such as its Java programming
language, which helped to establish Sun as a leader in the
software development industry. The company also expanded

                             131
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

its reach by entering new arenas, such as the server and storage
markets.
     Despite facing hurdles in the road, Sun Microsystems
played a vital role in the development of the modern com-
puter. The company’s innovative technology, strong leadership,
and commitment to customer satisfaction helped to establish
it as a leader in the computer industry. Sun’s legacy lives on in
the form of the many products and services that it developed,
such as Java and the Jenkins CI/CD automation server, which
continue to be used by businesses and individuals around the
world today.




                              132
                                  Sun




The Cobalt Qube, which came out from 1998-2002 from Cobalt
Networks, Inc. was designed to be a web server. The company was later
     acquired by Sun Microsystems. Photo credit: Amir Husain




                                133
Thinking
Machines
The LED panels of the CM-5 could randomly
generate patterns purely for viewing pleasure as
was seen in Jurassic Park. Public domain.
                         Thinking Machines




Sun Microsystems was not the only player in the
realm of powerful computers. Inventors were everywhere,
and some companies were building computers on a much
bigger scale. In fact, in 1993, one of these companies, Think-
ing Machines, had the four fastest computers in the world.
Let’s take a peek at them.
    Danny Hillis was born in 1956 in Baltimore, Maryland.
He studied electrical engineering and computer science at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and later
received a PhD from the California Institute of Technology.
His early research focused on the use of parallel processing to
solve complex problems, an area that was largely unexplored
at the time. He also focused much of his research on artificial
intelligence.
    In 1985, Hillis founded the company Thinking Machines
Corporation, which was dedicated to the development of par-
allel computing technology. The company’s flagship product
was the Connection Machine, a supercomputer that was capa-
ble of performing a billion calculations per second. The Con-
nection Machine was one of the first supercomputers to use
massively parallel processing and was used by researchers in

                              137
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

a wide range of fields, including artificial intelligence, com-
puter graphics, and scientific computing. On a fun side note,
Thinking Machines was the third company to register a .com
domain name (think.com). In case you’re interested, comput-
er manufacturer Symbolics was the first (symbolics.com), and
DARPANET contractor BBN was the second (bbn.com).




Connection Machine computer CM-1 at Computer Museum of America
       (CMoA) Photo credit: Jud McCranie, CC BY-SA 3.0


    In addition to his work on parallel computing, Hillis has
also made contributions to the field of artificial intelligence.
He is the co-author of the book The Pattern on the Stone (Ba-
sic Books, 1998), which is considered a classic in the field of
artificial intelligence. He is also the author of several patents


                              138
                       Thinking Machines
and has published numerous papers on computer science and
engineering.
    Hillis has received many awards and honors throughout
his career, including the National Medal of Technology and
Innovation, which he received in 2016. He is also a Fellow
of the Association for Computing Machinery, the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and the American Asso-
ciation for the Advancement of Science.




Thinking Machines CM-5 FROSTBURG at the National Cryptologic
       Museum. Photo credit: Mark Pellegrini, CC BY-SA 2.5



                            139
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    Today, Hillis continues to work on a wide range of projects,
including the development of new computer architectures and
the study of the nature of intelligence. He is also a professor of
computer science at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol-
ogy and is a member of the faculty at the Santa Fe Institute,
a research organization that focuses on the study of complex
systems.
    Think you’ve never seen or heard of the Connection Ma-
chine? Flashback to 1993. Jurassic Park came out in theaters
as an epic blockbuster. Traitorous programmer Dennis Nedry
mentions “eight Connection Machines” while in the park’s
control room. Dummies of the Connection Machines are vis-
ible in the background. Also, in the same movie, in the fun
video that explains (with some pseudoscience) how dinosaurs
are cloned, the video mentions “Thinking Machines Super-
computers.” Could the Connection Machine have truly been
used to help clone dinosaurs? Doubtful as Thinking Machines
filed for bankruptcy in 1994 and was largely acquired by Sun
Microsystems.




                               140
Apollo/
Domain
An open PDP-8/E. Photo credit: Morn,
CC BY-SA 3.0
                          Apollo/Domain




The Minicomputer Reinvented
For clarity, let’s do a quick refresher on how we
define different types of computers. A mainframe is a (gen-
erally) very large, powerful computer, used often by big cor-
porations or governments for huge amounts of computing.
The UNIVAC 1, a mainframe from 1951, became famous
for predicting the outcome of the election the following year,
with Eisenhower winning in a landslide.
    A microcomputer is a small, lower cost computer with a
microprocessor. The Commodore 64 was one of the most pop-
ular microcomputers of its time, gracing many basements and
spawning a new flurry of computer programmers.




                             145
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




Commodore CBM 8032 came out in 1984 as a revived version of the
       Commodore PET line. Photo credit: Amir Husain




Tandy/Radio Shack TRS-80 (Model I) came out in 1977 with a sticker
price of $599. It was the bestselling PC line until 1982. Photo credit:
                 Dave Jones - EEVblog, CC BY-SA 4.0


                                 146
                              Apollo/Domain




The Atari 800XL came out in 1983 and was positioned to be a market
leader. However, supply chain issues caused shortages during the critical
            Christmas season. Photo Credit: Amir Husain




The original 1977 Apple II. When the computer line was retired in 1993,
between 5 and 6 million units had been produced. Photo credit: Rama &
                    Musée Bolo, CC BY-SA 2.0 fr


                                  147
                           SERIOUS MACHINES




The C64 Mini is a modern-day recreation of the Commodore 64. The
original Commodore 64, which was widely available, outsold all compet-
itors and went on to achieve the Guinness World Record for being the
highest selling single computer model of all time, with estimates between
         12 and 17 million units sold. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    A minicomputer is a type of computer that sits between a
mainframe and a microcomputer in terms of size, capability,
and cost. The minicomputer has come a long way from the
previously mentioned PDP-1 back in 1958, having undergone
a significant evolution in recent years. With the advent of new
technologies and the increasing demand for more powerful
and versatile computers, the minicomputer has been reinvent-
ed as a workstation, which can be thought of as a dedicated
minicomputer. Let’s look at how that happened.

                                  148
                              Apollo/Domain




A modern recreation of the PDP-11/70 front panel. This system is pow-
ered by a Raspberry Pi that can easily emulate the entire PDP! The orig-
inal machines came out in 1975 and were based on the Unibus data bus.
An upgrade from the PDP-11/45, the new model allowed 4 MB of phys-
ical memory, 2 KB of cache memory, and fast I/O device connection.
                      Photo credit: Amir Husain


     Apollo was a company that developed workstations in the
1980s, before the rise of Sun Microsystems. They competed
with Sun by offering similar capabilities at a lower cost. Apol-
lo’s workstations were known for their high performance and
advanced graphics capabilities and were widely used in the
scientific and engineering communities. The Domain work-
stations were some of the first minicomputers to be used as
workstations. The naming conventions for the computers were
DN (standing for Domain Node) or DSP (Domain Service
Processor) for those models with no monitors.

                                  149
                           SERIOUS MACHINES

    Developed in the 1970s, these computers were designed
for use in research and engineering environments and were
known for their high performance and advanced graphics ca-
pabilities. They were used in a variety of industries, including
aerospace, automotive, and telecommunications.
    The first model, the DN416 was renamed the DN100 when
a black-and-white screen replaced the previous green screen.
For the next 9 years, Apollo continued to release workstations
until the company was eventually acquired by Hewlett-Pack-
ard (HP) in 1989.




Released in 1984, the AT&T PC 6300 was AT&T's first IBM compati-
ble computer. It used a 16 bit, Intel 8086 chip that ran at 8 MHz. Photo
                          credit: Amir Husain



                                  150
                             Apollo/Domain




The Atari 1040ST with a Megafile hard drive. The Atari ST, released in
1985, was Atari's next step to keep up with Commodore. The Atari ST
needed storage, and for that, the Atari Megafile 30 was released. Photo
                          credit: Amir Husain




                                  151
Hewlett-Packard
A late 1970s Hewlett-Packard calculator
advertisement. Fair use.
                          Hewlett-Packard




HP’s Journey Into HP-UX and Workstations
HP, or Hewlett-Packard, is a company that has a
long history in the technology industry, dating back to the
1930s when it was first founded in a garage in Palo Alto by
Bill Hewlett and David Packard. Walt Disney was making
their third animated feature film, Fantasia, and they needed
a low distortion frequency oscillator. Hewlett and Packard
developed the HP 200A, and the company was born. Both
graduates of electrical engineering from Stanford University,
they flipped a coin to determine if the company should be
named Hewlett-Packard or Packard-Hewlett. This same se-
ries of oscillators continued to be produced until 1972.
    Initially, HP focused on scientific and test instruments, but
in the 1960s, they began to expand their vision. Previously,
they’d used DEC minicomputers to hook to their instruments,
but then decided that instead of working with DEC, they’d
build their own.




                              155
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    They started with the HP 2100 / HP 1000 in 1966. Like
the oscillator before it, HP’s products had longevity. This series
of minicomputers stayed in production for 20 years and in-
spired both the HP 9800 and the HP 250 series of computers.




The HP 9000 series came out in 1984 and had a lifespan of over 25
years. The HP 9000 300 series shown here was based around Motorola
           68000-series processors. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    In 1968, they came out with the Hewlett-Packard 9100A,
which Wired magazine touted as the world’s first personal
computer. But officially producing computers was a change
for HP, and their machines didn’t look anything like the IBM
computers of the day. They didn’t want to scare off their cus-
tomers, so they marketed the device as a desktop calculator. HP
became well known over the years for its robust and powerful

                               156
                           Hewlett-Packard
line of calculators, including the clamshell HP-28S.




Released in 1976, the HP 2645A could handle speeds up to 9600 baud
  and had an introductory price of $3500. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    In the 1970s and 1980s, HP began to expand. This marked
the beginning of HP’s journey into the world of workstations
and Unix-based computing. In the early days of workstations,
HP’s offerings were primarily focused on technical and sci-
entific fields, such as engineering and design. However, as the
market for workstations began to expand and evolve, HP be-
gan to develop more general-purpose workstations that could
be used in a variety of industries, such as entertainment and
finance. This led to their HP 9000 series of computers, which
came out in 1984. This line of workstations built on ideas
from many previous workstation designs of the time. It also

                                157
                          SERIOUS MACHINES

incorporated HP’s own FOCUS microprocessor, while many
previous workstations were built with the Motorola 68000 se-
ries of microprocessors.
    Along with the HP 9000 series of workstations came one
of HP’s most notable contributions. All HP 9000 workstations
used HP-UX, a version of the Unix operating system designed
by HP that was specifically tailored to their own workstations.
HP-UX was designed to be a more user-friendly and versatile
version of Unix.




Introduced at the end of 1981, the HP 9836 came with dual floppy disk
drives and a 12.2 inch screen (390 x 512 dot resolution). Photo credit:
                             Amir Husain


                                 158
                          Hewlett-Packard
    HP-UX was first released in 1984 and quickly became
popular among workstation users. It was known for its stabil-
ity and reliability, as well as its ability to run on a wide range
of hardware. In addition to the HP 9000 series, HP continued
to develop a range of workstation computers that ran HP-UX.
These machines were known for their high performance and
advanced features, such as support for multiple processors and
large amounts of memory. HP continued to develop and im-
prove HP-UX over the years, and it remains one of the most
widely used versions of Unix to this day.
    HP played an important role in the development of work-
station computers and Unix operating systems. Their contri-
butions helped make workstations more accessible and versa-
tile, and solidified the way for the widespread use of Unix in
the business and enterprise world.




                               159
IBM
RS/6000
A vintage ad for IBM typewriters.
Fair use.
                          IBM RS/6000




While HP has a long history in the technology
industry, IBM’s enduring prominence is even more impres-
sive. Back in 1911, the Computing-Tabulating-Recording
Company (CTR) was founded as a holding company for re-
cord-keeping and measuring systems manufacturers. In 1924,
it was renamed International Business Machines, and the
IBM name was born. IBM was initially a leader in punch-
card tabulating systems, but soon expanded into other mar-
kets. Many of the (slightly) older generation may remember
sitting in a high school classroom full of clacking IBM elec-
tric typewriters practicing typing. Or they may remember
heading off to college in the mid-80s and being required to
buy an IBM personal computer (with two floppy disk drives
and no hard drive). IBM is the brains behind many techni-
cal advances, including ATM machines, DRAM, the floppy
disk, the magnetic stripe card, and the IPC barcode, which is
found on items sold worldwide.




                             163
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




The IBM PC 5160 xt Personal Computer (often called the PC/XT) was
sold between 1983 and 1987. It had up to eight expansion slots. Photo
                       credit: Amir Husain


    Though IBM was one of the first, most common personal
computers, soon other manufacturers began entering the mar-
ket, making solid machines for competitive prices. IBM found
itself losing market share and began to look for more ways to
diversify. Developing workstations was a natural direction for
IBM to pursue. The RT/PC, which was released in 1986, was
IBM’s concept for a faster, more efficient, and more powerful
version of the personal computer (PC). It was the first IBM
workstation and was powered by IBM’s own RISC (Reduced
Instruction Set Computing) processor, which was designed to

                                164
                             IBM RS/6000
handle complex, floating-point calculations more efficiently
than traditional CISC (Complex Instruction Set Computing)
processors. This made it well-suited for use in scientific and en-
gineering applications, where such calculations were common.
     The RT/PC also featured a multi-user operating system,
which allowed multiple users to work on the same machine
simultaneously. This was a significant improvement over the
single-user, single-tasking operating systems that were prev-
alent on PCs at the time. This made it possible for teams of
engineers and scientists to work together on projects, sharing
resources and data in real-time.
     In addition to its powerful hardware and multi-user ca-
pabilities, the RT/PC also featured a range of software tools
that were specifically tailored to the needs of scientists and
engineers. These tools included CADAM (computer-aided
design software), mathematical modeling software, and other
specialized applications.
     Despite its many advantages, the RT/PC was not a com-
mercial success. It was a bit late to the market, coming out in
1986, and thus had to compete with other brands that were
already established in the market. In addition, the name was
confusing, with customers wondering why it had “PC” in it
if it wasn’t a PC. It was also relatively expensive compared to
other workstations of the time, coming in at around $20,000.
Finally, its target market of scientific and engineering users
was relatively small. Only about 23,000 units were sold over
the course of its lifetime. However, the RT/PC did pave the
way for the development of other IBM workstations.
     In retrospect, the RT/PC was an important milestone in

                               165
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

the development of workstations. It was one of the first exam-
ples of a powerful, multi-user computer that was designed spe-
cifically for use in scientific and engineering applications. Its
design and architecture influenced many other workstations
that followed, and it helped to establish IBM as a major player
in the workstation market.
    In 1991, work began on the PowerPC processor, a joint
effort between IBM and Motorola at the Somerset facility in
Austin, Texas. The joint effort was called AIM, standing for
Apple-IBM-Motorola. Among the machines that used these
processors were the RS/6000 line of workstations and super-
computers, released in the 1990s, which were a much more
successful line of workstations than the RT/PC. While most
of the RS/6000 computers were of the desktop or deskside
variety, laptop versions were also made available. In addition to
delivering significant processing power to these workstations,
the POWER chip at the heart of the RS/6000 also formed
the basis of the ASCII White supercomputer, which was the
world’s fastest computer in the early 2000s.




                              166
                            IBM RS/6000




An IBM RS/6000 340 RISC Workstation. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    IBM’s RS/6000 workstations were known for their high
performance and advanced graphics capabilities. They were
based on IBM’s RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computing)
architecture, which was designed to provide faster and more
efficient computing power. They were widely used in the sci-
entific and engineering communities.
    Perhaps the most “famous” RS/6000 machine was the
Deep Blue supercomputer that beat chess master and world
champion Garry Kasparov in 1997. This was not the first time
Kasparov had faced off against a computer, but it was the first
time he lost. The machine played so well, in fact, that Kasparov
requested machine logs of the computer to make sure there
had been no cheating.

                              167
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

    The processing power of the RS/6000 was used for more
than playing chess, however. In the 1990s, IBM’s ads fea-
turing ray traced spheres captured the imagination of many
technically minded people. Ray tracing is a graphics technique
where shadows and light from objects interact with each other,
changing how objects are viewed, and the RS/6000 had the
power to take this to the next level.
    In 2000, the RS/6000 brand was retired, making way for
the eServer pSeries, a high-end line of RISC servers. After
this came the IBM Power Systems server series, which was
based on IBM’s Power processors. Though no longer in the
personal computer or desktop workstation market, IBM con-
tinues to be a significant presence in computing, with lead-
ing mainframes and even machines in the nascent Quantum
Computing space.




                             168
Silicon
Graphics
A 1995 Silicon Graphics ad for the
redesign of the Boeing 777. Fair use.
                         Silicon Graphics




As we’ve already discussed, with the Utah teapot
of 1975, the University of Utah was a hotbed in the field of
graphics and was home to several influential figures in the
development of graphics technology. Among these was Ivan
Sutherland, a computer scientist, professor, inventor, and also
a key figure in the development of graphics technology. He
and his colleague, David Evans, founded the company, Evans
& Sutherland in 1968, which was one of the leading manu-
facturers of computer graphics systems. Their work on inter-
active computer graphics and virtual reality was instrumental
in the development of modern computer graphics and visu-
alization technology.
    As a professor at the University of Utah, Sutherland had
many students who went on to make their mark in graphics
history. Among these was graphics legend Jim Clark, a com-
puter scientist and entrepreneur best known for his work on
the Geometry Engine, a groundbreaking graphics system that
was capable of producing highly detailed and realistic images.
This technology was the foundation of Clark’s company, Sil-
icon Graphics Inc (SGI) in 1981, which became one of the
leading manufacturers of high-end workstations.

                              173
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    Silicon Graphics Inc (SGI) quickly became one of the hot-
test companies in the valley, known for its pioneering work
in graphics computing. The company was responsible for de-
veloping some of the first high-performance graphics systems
and software. SGI’s technology was used in a wide range of
industries, including film, television, architecture, and engi-
neering. It was considered the gold standard for 3D graphics
and animation in the 1980s and 1990s.
    3D animation was not new. A brief history of 3D ani-
mation would have us looking back to the early 1900s. Clay-
mation was created, where figures modeled out of clay were
gradually changed to invoke the feeling that the figures were
moving. This brought about the era of stop-motion filmmak-
ing. Perhaps one of the better-known Claymation films of the
time was The Sculptor’s Welsh Rarebit Dream, which came out in
1908 from Edison Manufacturing. Yes, you can still watch this
(amazing? terrifying? revolutionary?) short film on YouTube:

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jWL0o_0E46I&ab_
channel=ClassicsofWorldCinema

    We cannot forget to mention one of the greatest filmmak-
ers known for using stop-motion. Ray Harryhausen was an
icon in animation and special effects who brought us such be-
loved movies as The 7th Voyage of Sinbad (1958), Jason and the
Argonauts (1963), and the inimitable Clash of the Titans (1981).




                              174
                              Silicon Graphics




A sculptor's dream (or nightmare) became the subject matter of this early
              Claymation film. Photo credit: Public domain


     Yet despite further follow-ons, like Gumby, Claymation
never took off the way its creators had hoped, possibly due to
complexity and its tedious nature. It should be noted, howev-
er, that Claymation and stop-motion film-making still hold a
spot in the hearts of many. Films like Coraline and The Night-
mare Before Christmas embraced the technique, much to view-
ers’ delight, and if the list of Claymation hits is any clue, this
storytelling technique is not going away anytime soon.




                                  175
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




The SGI Fuel was released in 1992 with a list price of $11,495. Photo
                        credit: Amir Husain

                                 176
                          Silicon Graphics


    It wasn’t really until the 1960s and ’70s that 3D animation
found a new lease on life. William Fetter of Boeing created
“Boeing Man,” which was a 3D animation using computers
and 3D models to show how a human would move in an air-
plane cockpit. In 1974, Frederic Parke, a computer scientist at
the University of Utah, came out with the short film, Face &
Body Parts. The film shows a range of expressions on a 3D an-
imated face, with one expression blending into the next. It was
“cool” enough to be used in the 1976 science-fiction movie Fu-
tureworld. The technology was impactful enough that it went
on to influence the facial expressions that we see in movies and
television today.
    Follow-ons to this were Star Wars: A New Hope in 1977 and
Tron in 1982. But it was truly the power of the workstation,
new software, and Silicon Graphics that took 3D animation
to a new level.
    One of SGI’s most notable achievements was the devel-
opment of one of the first and most memorable fully textured
3D computer-generated animations in a feature film. The film
was James Cameron’s Terminator 2: Judgment Day, released
in 1991. SGI’s technology was also used to create one of the
first fully computer-generated characters in a feature film, the
T-1000 character in the same movie. SGI machines then went
on to be used in films like Jurassic Park and Toy Story, just to
name a couple.




                              177
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




The SGI Visual Workstation 330 shown here had a dual processor
Pentium II/III. The machines were sold between 1999 and 2002. Photo
                        credit: Amir Husain



                                178
                            Silicon Graphics




The SGI IRIS Indigo workstations were produced between 1992 and
1997. IRIS is an acronym for Integrated Raster Imaging System. Photo
                        credit: Amir Husain

                                179
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




This workstation was presented by SGI to Steven Spielberg, and only
one such signed version exists. It was used when Spielberg was making
 Jurassic Park. From the author's collection. Photo credit: Amir Husain

                                 180
                          Silicon Graphics
    In addition to its work in the film industry, SGI also made
significant contributions to the video game industry. SGI’s
technology was used to create some of the first 3D video
games, including the popular flight simulator game Falcon 3.0
and the first-person shooter game Doom.
    SGI’s success in the 1980s and 1990s was due to its cut-
ting-edge technology and its ability to attract top talent in the
fields of computer graphics and animation. However, as the
personal computer market grew in the late 1990s, and per-
sonal computers became increasingly powerful, SGI’s market
share began to decline. The company struggled to adapt to the
changing market and ultimately filed for bankruptcy in 2006.
    Despite its downfall, SGI’s legacy lives on through the
many industries and technologies that it helped to shape, in-
cluding film, television, video games, and computer graphics.
The company’s contributions to the field of computer graph-
ics and animation were groundbreaking, and its technology
continues to be used and studied by professionals in the field
today.




                               181
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




The SGI Octane was released between 1997 and 2000. It was the direct
        successor to the Indigo2. Photo credit: Amir Husain

                                182
NeXT
A chance to win a NeXT computer.
Fair use.
                                NeXT




In the late 1980s, Steve Jobs, who had been ousted
from Apple in 1985, set out to create a new type of computer
workstation. He wanted to build a machine that would not
only be powerful and innovative but also visually striking and
memorable. He wanted to create a machine that users want-
ed to own. The result was the NeXT workstation, which was
first released in 1988.
    One of the most distinctive features of the NeXT worksta-
tion was its cube-like design and magnesium case. The work-
station also had an optical drive, which was a novel feature at
the time, making it look science-fiction futuristic compared
to its predecessor, the floppy disk drive. The NeXT worksta-
tion was also equipped with a brand-new operating system,
NeXTSTEP. This OS was based on Unix and was designed to
be user-friendly and intuitive. It featured a regular, Mac-like
user interface, and it was also one of the first operating sys-
tems to offer true preemptive multitasking. It was on this very
operating system that Tim Berners-Lee (known as TimBL)
wrote the first web server, client, and developed the HTTP
protocol. The first website in the world (not the first registered
dot com) was hosted on a NeXT workstation in Switzerland.

                               187
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

It was for CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear
Research) and can still be browsed today, thanks to a 2013 ef-
fort to restore it (info.cern.ch). And for the gamers out there,
both Doom and Quake, of id Software, were designed on the
NeXTSTEP operating system.
    Despite its impressive features and design, the NeXT
workstation was not a commercial success. The high cost of the
workstation ($9999 at the time, equivalent to over $22k now)
and the limited market for such a specialized machine were
among the reasons for its failure. But NeXT was not DOA. In
1997, Apple acquired NeXT, and the NeXTSTEP operating
system became the basis for the Macintosh systems and OS/X.
    The NeXT workstation may not have been a commercial
success, but it was a significant development in the history
of computer workstations. It was one of the first commercial
computers to feature the Mach kernel running on top of a
BSD-derived Unix OS and an innovative, object-oriented
user interface. In addition, the design and styling of the NeXT
workstation was also ahead of its time, and it set the stage for
the design and form of the Macintosh systems and OS/X.




                              188
                                 NeXT




The NeXTstation Turbo Color was released in 1999 with an introductory
price of $6500. The computer was nicknamed "the slab" due to its piz-
          za-box shaped form factor Photo credit: Amir Husain


                                189
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




The NeXTcube came out between 1990 and 1993 and retailed for $7995.
                   Photo credit: Amir Husain


   NeXT’s various workstations are now all collector’s items,
and they are considered among the most innovative and imag-
inative computers ever made. It is also a testament to Steve
Jobs’ vision and creativity as an architect. It’s a shame that it
didn’t achieve the widespread adoption it deserved, but its leg-
acy is still present in the Macintosh systems we use today.




                               190
                                  NeXT




Another spinoff from Apple was Be Inc. which was founded in 1990 by
former Apple Computer executive Jean-Louis Gassée. The main intent
of the company was to develop a new operating system using C++ on
proprietary software, which was BeOS and the minimized BeIA. The first
unit was released in 1995. Unique to the machine were the light strips
on either side, indicating activity in the respective PowerPC CPU. The
original slogan for the company was " One processor per person is not
                     enough." Photo credit: Fair use




                                 191
Mac Meets Unix
A 1980s advertisement for Apple
Computer. Fair use.
                          Mac Meets Unix




In the late 1980s, Macintosh computers, though
user-friendly with their GUI interface, lacked some of the
key features that many professionals and businesses needed
in a computer system. One of the biggest shortcomings was
the lack of multi-user and preemptive multitasking capabil-
ities. This meant that multiple people couldn’t use the same
computer at the same time, and tasks couldn’t be easily pri-
oritized or switched between.
    To address this, Apple decided to bring the power and ca-
pabilities of the Unix operating system to the Macintosh plat-
form. In 1988, they introduced A/UX, an operating system
that combined the Macintosh user interface with Unix-based
technology.




                             195
                           SERIOUS MACHINES




Apple Lisa 2/5, circa 1984, with a ticket price around $5000. Unlike the
Apple Lisa 2, the 2/5 model came bundled with either a 5 or 10 megabyte
                  hard drive. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    A/UX was designed to provide a familiar, Mac-like expe-
rience while also offering the robustness and capabilities of a
Unix system. It included features such as multi-user support,
preemptive multitasking, and support for virtual memory. It
also had a command-line interface that was integrated with
the regular Mac UI, making it easy for users to switch between
the two.




                                  196
                             Mac Meets Unix




The Macintosh Classic (left) was released between 1990 and 1992 and
sold for less than $1000. The Macintosh Color Classic (right) was re-
leased between 1993 and 1995 and was capable of supporting thousands
of colors. This was the final model of the "compact" Macintosh computer
                     family. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    Despite its innovative design, A/UX was never a com-
mercial success. It was relatively expensive compared to oth-
er Macintosh systems, and it was only available for a limited
number of Macintosh models. It was also considered buggy
and unstable, which further hindered its popularity.
    Despite its lack of success, A/UX is considered one of
the most unique and rare Unix systems in existence. It’s an
interesting glimpse into what Apple’s Macintosh platform
could have been, had it been developed with more Unix-like


                                  197
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

capabilities from the start. While A/UX may not have been
the breakthrough that Apple had hoped for, it was an import-
ant step in the development of the Macintosh platform, and
it paved the way for the development of Mac OS X, which is
widely considered one of the most powerful and user-friendly
Unix-based operating systems.
    Mac OS X, also known as macOS, was first released in
2001, and it marked a significant shift in Apple’s approach to
operating systems. With the rise of Unix-based systems in the
enterprise market and the increasing demand for more pow-
erful and versatile computers, Apple once again knew they
needed to incorporate Unix to survive. The company decided
to bring Unix to the Mac and cover the command-line expe-
rience with a regular, Mac-like user interface.
    As we talked about earlier, this decision was heavily influ-
enced by the work of Steve Job’s NeXT company, which had
developed a Unix-based operating system called NeXTSTEP.
Apple acquired NeXT in 1997 and used its technology as the
foundation for Mac OS X. In fact, many of the libraries in
Mac OS X are named “ns____” as an homage to NeXTSTEP.




                              198
                               Mac Meets Unix




The Apple G3 "clamshell" was released in 1999 and retailed for $1599. It
was available in 5 colors, including the "tangerine" shown in this picture.
When closed, it featured a handle for carrying. Photo credit: Amir Husain


    One of the key features of Mac OS X is its ability to run
both Macintosh and Unix applications, making it a versatile
and powerful system. It also introduced a number of new
technologies, such as the Darwin kernel, the Aqua user in-
terface, and the Cocoa application programming interface.
These technologies allowed for better performance, security,
and stability compared to previous versions of the Macintosh
operating system.




                                   199
                          SERIOUS MACHINES




Apple's G4 Cube was released in the year 2000 for $2,299. Photo credit:
                           Amir Husain


    Another important aspect of Mac OS X is its open-source
nature. Many of its core components, such as the Darwin ker-
nel, are available under the Apple Public Source License. This
allows developers to contribute to and improve upon the op-
erating system, making it more adaptable to different types of
hardware and software.
    Mac OS X was a game changer for Apple and the en-
tire computing industry. It brought the power and versatil-
ity of Unix to the Macintosh platform and provided a solid
foundation for future versions of the operating system. Today,
macOS continues to be a popular choice among developers,

                                 200
                          Mac Meets Unix
designers, and power users due to its Unix-based architecture,
open-source nature, and wide range of software options, in-
cluding Xcode—a development environment for creating iOS
and macOS apps, Final Cut Pro—a video editing software,
and Logic Pro—a music production software.




                             201
PART 4
The Evolution
of the
Workstation
The Workstation
Revolution
The text-based adventure game Zork was
written in MDL which was similar to
LISP. Fair use.
                    The Workstation Revolution




The workstation revolution was a pivotal mo-
ment in the history of computing. The development of new
technologies and the increased use of graphical interfaces
greatly improved the usability and efficiency of computers,
making them more accessible to a wider range of users. The
work of pioneers like Douglas Engelbart, Jim Clark, Ivan
Sutherland, and the founders of Sun Microsystems played
a crucial role in the development of the modern computer
and laid the foundation for the personal computer and the
Internet as we know it today.
    One of the main driving forces behind the workstation
revolution was the US government’s efforts to defend against
missile threats during the Cold War. The creation of networks
and the development of new protocols were crucial in inte-
grating radar sites all over the country and formed the back-
bone of the Internet.
    The workstation revolution also led to a graphics revolu-
tion, with the development of new graphics systems and the
emergence of companies like SGI and Evans & Sutherland,
which played an important role in the development of modern
computer graphics and visualization technology.

                             207
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    The workstation revolution also had a significant impact
on the field of artificial intelligence with the development of
specialized workstations specifically designed for AI applica-
tions. The AI boom of the 1980s saw a renewed interest in
artificial intelligence and its potential applications. With this
renewed interest came a need for specialized workstations that
could handle the computational demands of AI applications.
    One of the most notable examples of workstations de-
signed for AI were the LISP machines, which were a variety
of machines dedicated to running LISP, a programming lan-
guage commonly used for AI applications.
    Created in the 1960s, LISP is the third oldest high-level
programming language. LISP machines were capable of han-
dling the large amounts of data and complex calculations re-
quired for AI applications. We can thank LISP machines for
tasks that we take for granted today, such as garbage collection
(memory management—not curbside pickup), laser printing,
high resolution rasterizing graphics, and windowing systems.
Though the term “workstation” had not yet been coined, the
LISP machine can be thought of as the first commercially
available one.




                              208
                     The Workstation Revolution




Symbolics 3640 Lisp machine Photo credit: Michael L. Umbricht and
  Carl R. Friend (Retro-Computing Society of RI) CC BY-SA 3.0



                              209
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    The Symbolics company was a key player in the develop-
ment of workstations for AI. Remember from earlier? Sym-
bolics holds the claim-to-fame of registering the first dot com
in 1985 (symbolics.com). Founded in 1980, Symbolics was
one of the leading manufacturers of LISP machines, and their
products were widely used in AI research and development.
As AI was booming, decision-making algorithms were con-
tinually refined. Among these was the expert system, originally
conceived of in the 1970s but brought to life in the 1980s.
Simply put, an expert system was a series of IF-THEN state-
ments that the computer used to make decisions. The Sym-
bolics 3640, a LISP machine, which debuted in 1984, was an
early platform for expert systems. Could the machine diagnose
a health condition? That was one of the goals, with symptoms
and lab results being fed in as input.
    While the workstation revolution has had a profound im-
pact on the way we use and interact with computers today, it
also represented a turning point in the history of computing. It
marked the shift from computers as primarily computational
devices to computers as communication tools. The work of the
pioneers and companies mentioned in this book laid the foun-
dation for the modern computer and the Internet, and their
impact will continue to be felt for many years to come.




                              210
Every PC a
Workstation
The Royal Charter sank in an October
1859 storm which established the need
for weather forecasting. Public domain.
                       Every PC a Workstation




The rise of numerical computing in the 1970s and
1980s, which is the process of using mathematical algorithms
to solve complex problems, was a major factor in the devel-
opment of the workstation. Workstations were designed to
handle the complex calculations and simulations required in
engineering and scientific research.
    The use of workstations in simulations and modeling be-
came particularly important in various fields. With worksta-
tions, engineers and scientists could use simulations to test the
behavior of a system under different conditions, without the
need for physical prototypes. This allowed for more efficient
and cost-effective research and development.
    The role of parallel computing in scientific research, which
involves the use of multiple processors to perform calculations
simultaneously, also became crucial. Parallel computing greatly
increased the speed and efficiency of the computations. This
became particularly useful in fields such as weather forecasting
and climate modeling, where the amount of data and the com-
plexity of the calculations required significant computational
power.



                              215
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

    Workstations went on to have a significant impact in en-
gineering and science. In aerospace engineering, workstations
were used for simulations and modeling of aircraft and space-
craft designs. In mechanical engineering, workstations were
used for simulations of stress and fatigue analysis on mechan-
ical components. In the field of fluid dynamics, workstations
were used for simulations of fluid flow, heat transfer, and
combustion.
    But despite their many uses, technology was a changing
field, and workstations needed to change along with it. Work-
stations needed to face the various roadblocks and adapt…or
be doomed to a fading existence.


A Delineated Market
The development of the personal computer in the
1980s had a significant impact on the workstation market.
Personal computers, or PCs, were smaller, more affordable,
and more accessible to the general public than workstations.
As PC technology continued to improve, advanced applica-
tions could now be run on them. Since PCs were much less
expensive than workstations, it made more sense for those
whose pockets were not quite as deep to do what they could
on PCs instead of workstations. So, what did this mean for
workstations? This led to a shift in the market, with work-
stations becoming more specialized and targeted towards
specific industries and applications, such as semiconductor
design and computer animation. Were workstations still
needed? Absolutely…more than ever.

                             216
                        Every PC a Workstation

The Dawn of the Internet
The rise of the Internet in the 1990s further im-
pacted the workstation market. The Internet paved the path
for easier collaboration and communication among engineers
and scientists, and also allowed for the sharing and distribu-
tion of large amounts of data. This led to the development of
cloud computing, where data and applications were stored
and accessed remotely over the Internet.
    Cloud computing had a significant impact on the worksta-
tion market, as it allowed for more flexibility and scalability in
the use of computational resources. We already talked about
how cloud computing is replacing the need for mainframes.
What is happening to mainframes today is what happened
to workstations after the dawn of the Internet. Were work-
stations still needed? Well, yes…but things were changing…
rapidly.


SCO Unix
The delineated market was clear, with PCs on
one side and workstations on the other. Unix workstations,
though expensive, were the go-to choice for scientists, engi-
neers, and other professionals who needed powerful comput-
ers to run complex simulations and analyze large amounts
of data. These workstations were equipped with multi-core
processors, large amounts of RAM, and fast disk drives. They
also had powerful graphics processors (GPUs) that could ac-
celerate the rendering of 3D graphics, making them ideal for

                               217
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

tasks such as computer-aided design (CAD) and scientific
visualization.
    In the early days of Unix workstations, RISC (Reduced In-
struction Set Computing) was the preferred architecture. RISC
processors were designed to handle complex, floating-point
calculations with a smaller number of simple instructions.
This made them well-suited for the demanding workloads of
workstations. Popular RISC-based workstations included the
SPARCstation from Sun Microsystems, the DEC Alpha from
Digital Equipment Corporation, the MIPS-based SGI work-
stations, and IBM’s POWER-based workstations.
    The IBM PC and compatible computers, with their CISC-
based (Complex Instruction Set Computing) architecture,
were not seen as serious work computers due to the limitations
of the single-tasking operating system, DOS. DOS lacked the
multi-tasking and multi-user capabilities that were necessary
for a true workstation. This made it difficult for these com-
puters to compete with more powerful and expensive work-
stations from companies like Sun, SGI, and Hewlett-Packard.
    However, a company called Santa Cruz Operation (SCO)
changed all that. Bell Labs, who had developed Unix starting
in 1969, could not sell Unix, as it was part of the regulated
Bell System. However, it could license Unix for resale, and in
1978, Microsoft purchased a license and began licensing their
version as XENIX. SCO, one of the companies that licensed
this Microsoft version, eventually acquired exclusive rights to
the software.




                             218
                       Every PC a Workstation




       The Microsoft XENIX tutorial. Photo credit: Fair use


   In 1983, SCO developed a version of Unix that could run
on Intel processors. First came the SCO XENIX system V,
which ran on Intel 8086 and 8088 CPUs. Next was the SCO
XENIX 286 and 386, named for their respective processors.
This Unix operating system allowed inexpensive clones to run
X-Windows and the entire Unix library of software. What a
change!

                               219
                        SERIOUS MACHINES




 IBM Personal System2 Model P70 356. Photo credit: Amir Husain.


    But it wasn’t apples to apples. The architectures of these
machines were vastly different. PCs were CISC-based and
workstations were RISC-based, but PCs could now run Unix
as well. Unlike RISC processors and their ability to handle
complex, floating-point calculations with a smaller number of
simple instructions, CISC processors were designed to handle
a wider range of tasks with a larger number of complex instruc-
tions. This made CISC processors more versatile, though also
less efficient, at handling complex floating-point calculations.
    This led to a debate over the relative merits of RISC and
CISC architectures, with some arguing that RISC was better

                              220
                       Every PC a Workstation
suited for high speed calculations while others argued that
CISC, while not as performant, was easier to write code for.
    Despite the debate, CISC-based systems started to pose a
serious threat to RISC-based workstations because many of
the advantages started disappearing. Intel borrowed concepts
from RISC in its later processors, and since they were a high-
er-volume product, they were also available at lower cost. With
SCO Unix and Windows NT, it became possible for IBM
PC-compatibles to run the same software as more expensive
workstations, giving rise to the “Unix on a PC” movement.
    SCO’s Unix for the PC was a real operating system that
could handle the demanding workloads of a true workstation.
It had all the features that were missing in DOS, including
multi-tasking, multi-user capabilities, and a graphical user in-
terface (GUI). All of a sudden, workstations were starting to
sweat. Were workstations still needed? Maybe not.


The Rise of Linux
The educational operating system MINIX, was de-
signed to help students understand how operating systems
worked. It was released by operating systems guru, Andrew
S. Tanenbaum in 1987. Then along came Linux, built by Li-
nus Torvalds. Torvalds started designing Linux as a hobby
project, after he got frustrated with the academic OS, Minix,
and the first versions of Linux were released in 1991. If it’s
not apparent, the name was a clever amalgamation of his first
name and Unix. (Try that with your own first name and see
how it sounds.) Oddly, this name was not his choice. His

                              221
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

intended name for the operating system was Freax, a combi-
nation of “free,” “freak,” and the letter X for Unix, but when
the administrator created the directory on the FTP server, it
was called Linux. The name stuck. With the rise of the Inter-
net and the increasing availability of free software, machines
running Linux became a popular alternative to expensive
Unix workstations.




The penguin Tux was the original Linux Mascot. Image credit: Larry
            Ewing, Simon Budig, Garrett LeSage CC0


    One of the key advantages of Linux is its ability to run on
a wide range of hardware. Even low-end machines such as 386
computers with just 4 or 8 MB of RAM could be converted
into Linux workstations. In addition, Linux is an open-source
operating system that is free to use, modify, and distribute. As
with the SCO operating systems before it, this made it possible
for anyone to convert a regular PC into a powerful workstation

                              222
                       Every PC a Workstation
simply by installing Linux on it. Students, hobbyists, and small
businesses could now afford a powerful workstation without
breaking the bank.
    In the early and mid-1990s, while still in school, I became
heavily involved in the Linux scene. I was living in my home-
town of Lahore at the time and interning at a United Na-
tions run internetworking project. I was an avid user of one of
the first Linux distributions, called Slackware. I deployed the
first operational web server in Pakistan for the Edunet project
and wrote a lot of billing and account management software
in the Perl programming language. Compared to a DOS and
Windows 3.1 PC, the Linux environment was vastly more
powerful with a large number of development tools built in;
from powerful programming languages like C, C++ and Perl,
to text-processing tools like sed, cut, grep and awk. The first
computer on which I installed Linux was a 66 Mhz 80486
based PC clone. Later, I was even able to get it running on a
25 Mhz 80386 Compaq LTE laptop!
    Ultimately, the appeal of Linux on CISC-based PCs
helped to cement the dominance of CISC in the worksta-
tion market. With the availability of powerful, low-cost Linux
workstations, engineers and scientists could now run complex
simulations and analysis on less expensive machines. This re-
duced the cost of running these simulations and opened up
new possibilities for research and development.
    Suffice it to say, the popularity of CISC machines did not
help the expensive workstation market, and like the Internet
and cloud computing, it played a part in its downfall. A grow-
ing number of businesses and organizations adopted SCO

                              223
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

Unix and Linux for their computing. This was a major shift in
the computer industry, as it made it possible for businesses and
organizations of all sizes to access the power and capabilities
of a true workstation without having to spend a fortune on
expensive hardware. This shift forced the major workstation
manufacturers to lower their prices and improve their product
offerings, in order to compete with the lower-cost PC-based
workstations. This ultimately led to a more competitive and
dynamic market for workstations, with more options and bet-
ter value for customers.
    Today, most workstations are based on CISC-based pro-
cessors, with Intel and AMD being the dominant players in
the market. These machines are powerful and versatile, with
multi-core processors, large amounts of RAM, and high-
speed storage. They also come with powerful GPUs (Graphics
Processing Units) that can be used for tasks such as machine
learning, computer vision, and scientific simulations. Popu-
lar software for these types of PCs includes engineering, data
analysis, and scientific software such as MATLAB, ANSYS,
MySQL, SolidWorks, and the LAMP stack. With the power-
ful capabilities of today’s workstations, engineers and scientists
can solve complex problems and make breakthroughs in their
respective fields.
    Linux has grown to become one of the most widely used
operating systems in the world. It is the foundation of the In-
ternet, with nearly every web page you access coming from a
Linux system. Linux is also the backbone of many large organi-
zations, including Google, Facebook, and Amazon. But Linux
isn’t just limited to servers and workstations. It’s also become

                               224
                        Every PC a Workstation
a popular choice for desktop and laptop computers, as well as
mobile devices. With the advancement of hardware and the
increasing performance of modern PCs, these machines are
now equipped with multiple cores, large amounts of RAM,
fast storage, and powerful graphics processors. They also have
large storage capacities, which are essential for storing large
datasets and models. These features make them ideal for tasks
such as 3D rendering, video editing, scientific simulations, and
machine learning.




VisionTek GeForce 256 DDR Graphic card. Photo credit: Public domain


    SCO Unix and Linux were designed for CPU-equipped
PCs, like the Intel x86 processors. The CPU, or the central pro-
cessing unit, was the focus of the discussion when one spoke
of the power of a machine. But then along came the GPU—
the graphics processing unit. There had been some graphics

                               225
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

accelerator cards that used Texas Instrument’s TIGA (TI
Graphics Accelerator) cards since the early 1990s, but GPUs
really took off as an industry when, in 1999, Nvidia came out
with the first GPU for the personal computer. Though orig-
inally intended for graphics processing, developers soon real-
ized they could harness the power of these processors for even
more. GPUs became more and more common for all tasks, not
just graphics, and are often integrated with CPUs themselves.
They are a go-to choice for deep learning and AI.
    One of the most popular examples of a modern GPU-
equipped PC running Linux is the Nvidia DGX H100. This
computer can be equipped with 8 Nvidia H100 GPUs and can
run both the Windows and Linux operating systems. It is de-
signed for high-performance computing (HPC) and artificial
intelligence (AI) workloads, and is capable of delivering up to
32 petaflops of performance.
    Another popular example of a modern GPU-equipped PC
running Windows is the Dell Precision 7920 Tower. This com-
puter is equipped with up to 4 Nvidia RTX A6000 GPUs, and
can support up to 28 cores and 384 GB of RAM. It is designed
for professionals in fields such as product design, engineer-
ing, and media and entertainment, and can handle demanding
tasks such as 3D rendering, video editing, and animation.




                             226
                       Every PC a Workstation




The Dell Precision 7920 Tower Workstation. Photo credit: Fair use




                              227
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

    In terms of software, there are many options available for
Linux PCs. For example, Blender is a popular open-source
3D content creation software that can take advantage of the
powerful GPUs in these PCs to accelerate rendering times.
It is a powerful 3D animation and rendering software that is
widely used in the film, television, and video game industries.
Autodesk Maya and Houdini are other examples of software
that can take advantage of the powerful GPUs in these PCs
to accelerate 3D animation and visual effects. TensorFlow and
PyTorch are popular frameworks for machine learning that
can also leverage the power of these GPUs to accelerate train-
ing and inference. Other popular software includes GIMP,
a powerful image editing software, and Octave, a powerful
scientific computing software used primarily for numerical
computation.
    So, to bring it all together, workstations as a specialized
type of computer are out, and beefy PCs that have essen-
tially merged with workstations, are in. GPU-equipped PCs
running Linux or modern Windows are the successors of
Unix workstations from days gone by. They offer even great-
er performance levels than their predecessors, with the ability
to support many more cores, much more RAM, faster disk
speeds, and larger disk sizes. They can support extremely fast
I/O, solid state storage, massive numbers of GPU cores, and
support for powerful AI model development libraries. Times
change, and with time, technology also evolves. Adaptation is
the key to survival, and PCs adapted faster than specialized
workstations.



                             228
Single Board
Computers
NASA's Open Source Rover powered by a
Raspberry Pi 3. Public Domain.
                      Single Board Computers




Now any PC could become a workstation. So,
what came next? Tiny workstations running Linux? How
much less expensive could the workstation become?


Raspberry Pi and the SBCs
The dream of inexpensive computers that could
run Linux has been around for a long time, but the UK-based
Raspberry Pi Foundation made this dream a reality with the
launch of the Raspberry Pi in 2012. The company—well, it
didn’t even start out as a company; it started out as a char-
ity—had a vision for teaching computer science in schools.
To do this, they needed an inexpensive computer—one that
could reach classrooms and students on even the lowest of
budgets. They came up with the design of their first board,
the Raspberry Pi Model B (also known as Raspi).




                             233
                        SERIOUS MACHINES




   Raspberry Pi Zero W. Photo credit: Les Pounder, CC BY-SA 2.0


    In addition to the ARM11 RISC-based processor, the
single board computer, which was about the size of a credit
card, had connectivity allowing a user to hook up a keyboard,
mouse, display. Though intended for the educational market,
the single-board computer capable of natively running Li-
nux, even supported a graphical user environment. It also had
a general-purpose input/output (GPIO) port, which allowed
other sensors and devices to be connected to it. Because of
this, it took off in popularity with hobbyists and makers. The
extremely inexpensive sticker price of $35 made it a fun and
affordable option for all sorts of projects. This helped to make
Linux the de facto development environment for the Internet
of Things (IoT), which is a fancy, though slightly inaccurate,
way to describe devices that can be connected over a network,
since devices do not need to be on the actual Internet.

                              234
                       Single Board Computers
    The success of the Raspberry Pi in the hobbyist and maker
communities led to a surge in the popularity of single-board
computers (SBCs). SBCs are small, low-cost computers that
are built on a single circuit board. They are typically powered
by ARM processors and run Linux or a similar operating sys-
tem. The Raspberry Pi was the first SBC to gain widespread
popularity, but it was quickly followed by a number of other
similar devices such as the Arduino, the BeagleBone, and the
Odroid.




     BeagleBone. Photo credit: BeagleBoard.org, CC BY-SA 3.0


                              235
                        SERIOUS MACHINES


    One of the major advantages of SBCs is their low cost.
Because they use ARM processors and other cost-effective
components, they can be sold for a fraction of the cost of a
traditional PC. This makes them accessible to a wide range
of users, from hobbyists and students to small businesses and
schools. They are also extremely versatile and can be used for
numerous applications, from simple web browsing and media
playback to more complex tasks, such as running a home au-
tomation system or building a robot.
    Another advantage of SBCs is their small size and low
power consumption. They are typically the size of a deck of
cards and can be powered by a small DC power supply. This
makes them ideal for use in embedded systems and portable
devices where space and power are at a premium. They can also
be integrated into a variety of devices, such as drones, robots,
and even cars.
    Despite their many advantages, SBCs do have some lim-
itations. One of the main drawbacks is that they are not as
powerful as traditional PCs. They have limited memory and
storage, and their processing power is hampered by the ARM
processors they use. This means that they are not suitable for
running resource-intensive applications, such as video editing
or 3D rendering. They are also limited by the operating sys-
tems they can run, which are typically Linux-based.




                              236
                      Single Board Computers




     Odroid-X2 Board. Photo credit: S03311251, CC BY-SA 4.0


    Despite limitations, the Raspberry Pi and other SBCs have
brought the dream of inexpensive, Linux-based computers to
reality. As the popularity of SBCs continues to grow, they are
likely to become an increasingly important part of the com-
puting landscape in the future.




                              237
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

ESP32
As technology continues to advance, Linux com-
puters become cheaper and smaller. The ESP32 is a sin-
gle-board microcontroller developed by Espressif Systems, a
Chinese manufacturer of embedded systems. It was first an-
nounced in 2016 and has since become one of the most pop-
ular microcontrollers for hobbyists and makers. One of the
major selling points of the ESP32 is its low cost. At around
$3-8, it is significantly cheaper than other microcontrollers
on the market, making it accessible to a wide range of users.
    Despite its low cost, the ESP32 is a powerful and versa-
tile microcontroller. It is based on the Xtensa dual-core 32-bit
LX6 microprocessor and has a wide range of features, includ-
ing Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity, a built-in touch sensor,
and a wide range of I/O options. The $6 SKUs generally sup-
port Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, making it the perfect edge system
for embedding smarts in legacy products, controlling some-
thing remotely, or gathering data.




                              238
                        Single Board Computers




 A photo of an Espressif ESP-WROOM-32 SMT Wi-Fi/Bluetooth
module (PCB with black solder mask). The module is soldered onto the
end of an Espressif ESP32-DevKitC V1 development board. Photo cred-
                     it: Brian Krent, CC BY-SA 4.0


    The ESP32 also supports a wide range of programming
languages, including C, C++, Python, and Lua. This makes
it accessible to both beginner and experienced programmers.
Newer models of the ESP32, such as the ESP32-S3-N8R8,
can run Linux, which makes it a popular choice for sophisti-
cated Internet of Things (IoT) applications.
    One of the most popular uses of the ESP32 is as an em-
bedded edge processor. The goal of edge computing is to bring

                                239
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

the computing power and data storage closer to the source
of data. The Wi-Fi and Bluetooth connectivity of the ESP32
makes it ideal for connecting to other devices and sensors,
making it easy to build smart systems that can be controlled
remotely. The low cost of the ESP32 makes it an ideal choice
for building low-cost monitoring and data gathering systems.
    Another popular use for the ESP32 is in hobbyist and
maker projects. The wide range of I/O options and the abili-
ty to run Linux make it a popular choice for building robots,
drones, and other DIY projects. The low cost and small size of
the ESP32 also make it a popular choice for building portable
projects, such as handheld gaming consoles and portable me-
dia players.
    To sum it up, the ESP32 is a powerful and versatile mi-
crocontroller that is well-suited for a considerable number of
applications. Its low cost and wide range of features make it an
ideal choice for hobbyists, makers, and professionals alike. As
technology continues to advance, we can expect to see more
and more applications for the ESP32, making it one of the
most important microcontrollers of our time.




                              240
Workstation
Software
A movie poster advertising the 1999
release of The Matrix. Fair use.
                      Workstation Software




Like musical instruments and a symphony, hard-
ware and software go together to make amazing things hap-
pen. Across the long history of workstation computing, soft-
ware has been steadily keeping stride, taking full advantage
of the processing power, graphics, and memory that worksta-
tions have to offer. Every time workstations changed, soft-
ware changed to stay relevant. As operating systems moved
from Unix to Linux, software needed to remain compatible.
And like with musical instruments and a symphony, the most
amazing compositions could create magic.


The Flame that gave birth to The Titanic
Discreet Flame, also known as Flame, is a high-
end, professional-grade editing software that was widely
used in the film and television industry. Developed by Dis-
creet Logic, a Canadian software company, Flame was first
released in the early 1990s and quickly became one of the
most widely used editing systems in the industry.
    The software was created by a team of developers led
by Mark Christiansen and Paul Saccone, who were both

                            245
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

experienced in the field of visual effects and film editing. Dis-
creet Logic, the company that developed Flame, was known
for its innovative and cutting-edge technology and was a lead-
er in digital editing systems.
    Flame was initially available for use on SGI workstations
running IRIX, their proprietary operating system, but later
versions were also released for Linux and Windows operating
systems. The software was known for its robust feature set and
powerful capabilities, including compositing, motion graphics,
and color correction.
    One of the most famous applications of Flame was its
use in the visual effects for the movie Titanic, which won the
Academy Award for Best Visual Effects in 1998. The software
was also used in the creation of visual effects for other block-
buster films, such as The Matrix (1999), Harry Potter and the
Goblet of Fire (2005), and Pirates of the Caribbean: At World’s
End (2007).




                              246
                           Workstation Software




Thanks to Discreet Logic, the Titanic was brought to life for an estimated
    over 2 billion viewers worldwide. Photo credit: Public domain


    Flame was also used in the television industry, particularly
for the creation of visual effects for shows such as Star Trek:
Deep Space Nine and The X-Files. Its advanced compositing
capabilities made it the go-to choice for creating high-quality
visual effects for broadcast television.
    Autodesk, which was founded in 1982 by John Walker and
a group of fellow programmers, acquired Discreet Logic in
1999, and Flame was renamed Autodesk Flame. The software
continues to be widely used in the film and television indus-
try and is known for its powerful capabilities and high-quality

                                   247
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

results. Though various platforms were supported for many
years, as of 2023, Autodesk Flame is no longer supported for
Windows machines, and instead, must be run on Linux or iOS.
    While with Discreet Logic, Flame was a proprietary soft-
ware. Now, Autodesk has been licensing the software to other
companies and also offering it as a cloud-based subscription
service, making it more accessible to smaller studios and inde-
pendent filmmakers.
    For those looking for the most powerful and versatile edit-
ing systems on the market, Flame is the top contender. Its rep-
utation as a high-end, professional-grade software has made it
the go-to choice for many top visual effects studios and film-
makers. It’s a versatile tool that can handle 2D, 3D, and even
compositing, rendering, and VFX workflows. Whether we’re
talking about big-budget films or small independent projects,
Flame is right there in the heart of it.


Making films with Maya
Maya is a 3D computer graphics software that is
used across the film and video game industry to create 3D
animations and visual effects. The software was first released
in 1998 and is now available on Windows, Mac, and Linux
operating systems.
    The development of Maya began in the early 1990s at the
Canadian company Alias Research. The first version of Maya,
named Maya 1.0, was released in 1998 and was available only
for the IRIX operating system. During its development, Walt
Disney Feature Animation worked closely with Alias during

                             248
                        Workstation Software
the production of the live-action/computer animated movie
Dinosaur, released in 2000. Though the software was initially
designed for use in the film and television industry, it quickly
gained popularity in other fields, such as architecture, industri-
al design, and video game development. After a series of acqui-
sitions, Maya was acquired by Autodesk in 2005 and became
officially known as Autodesk Maya (though the name Maya
has stuck). Though originally developed to run on IRIX-based
SGI workstations, Maya currently runs on machines running
Windows, macOS, and Linux.
    Maya is known for its powerful and versatile set of 3D
modeling, animation, and rendering tools. It has a wide range
of features, including polygon, NURBS (Non-Uniform Ra-
tional B-Splines), and subdivision surface modeling, motion
graphics, and visual effects. It also has a robust animation sys-
tem, which includes features such as keyframe animation, mo-
tion capture, and dynamic simulation.




                               249
                        SERIOUS MACHINES




          A NURBS Surface. Photo credit: Public domain


    Maya has been used to create visual effects for many Holly-
wood films, including Star Wars: Episode II - Attack of the Clones
(2002), The Lord of the Rings trilogy (2001-2003), and Avatar
(2009). It has also been used in the production of numerous
video games, including Halo, Assassin’s Creed, and Metal Gear
Solid. Maya continues to be a leader for creating visual effects
in movies and games, and it doesn’t appear to be going away
anytime soon. In 2015, every single movie in the running for
the best visual effects Oscar had Maya to thank. In case you’re
wondering, the 2015 winner was science-fiction masterpiece
Interstellar, directed by Christopher Nolan, with Paul Franklin,
Andrew Lockley, Ian Hunter, and Scott Fisher accepting the
award.

                               250
                       Workstation Software
    Maya has a large and active user community, which has
developed a slew of third-party plugins, scripts, and tools to
extend the software’s capabilities. Autodesk offers a variety of
training resources, including online tutorials, webinars, and
classroom training. The software is available as a subscription
service, though the price tag is on the steep side. But not to
worry, a free trial version is available, allowing anyone, from
professionals to students, to give the software a go.
    Hands down, Maya is a powerful and versatile 3D com-
puter graphics software that has become an industry standard
in the film and video game industries. With its powerful tools
and user-friendly interface, it has made the process of creating
3D animations and visual effects more accessible and efficient
for artists and designers.


Solving Symbolic Math with Mathematica
Mathematica is a powerful software program
for technical computing, created by Stephen Wolfram and
developed by Wolfram Research. The program was first re-
leased in 1988 and has since become a widely used tool in
fields such as mathematics, physics, engineering, and com-
puter science.
    One of the key features of Mathematica is its ability to
perform complex calculations and symbolic manipulation. The
program has a built-in programming language, which allows
users to create their own functions and algorithms, and can
also be used to perform tasks such as data analysis, visualiza-
tion, and simulations. Mathematica also includes a wide range

                              251
                          SERIOUS MACHINES

of built-in functions, such as those for algebraic and differen-
tial equations, statistics, and optimization.
    In addition to its technical capabilities, Mathematica also
has a user-friendly interface that makes it easy for users to
access its many features. The program includes a notebook in-
terface, which allows users to mix text, equations, and graphics
in a single document, making it a popular tool for creating
technical documents, reports, and presentations. Mathematica
also includes a number of tools for creating interactive visual-
izations, animations, and other interactive content.




The original Mathematica book published June 23, 1988, the day
Mathematica was released. Photo credit: Wolfram Mathematica, Fair use



                                252
                        Workstation Software
     Mathematica has been used in many applications, from re-
search in mathematics and physics to engineering and finance.
The program has been instrumental in the development of
new technologies, such as in the creation of the first-ever 3D
printed car, and in the design of new materials and products,
such as in the development of fuel-efficient engines. Many
universities and schools have also used Mathematica as a tool
to teach math, science, and engineering courses.
     At its release, Mathematica 1.0 was limited on which plat-
forms it could run on. Today, Mathematica is available for
most platforms, including Windows, macOS, and Linux, and
can be used on both desktops and mobile devices. The program
is licensed and is available in both personal and commercial
versions. Mathematica can also be deployed as a cloud-based
service, which allows users to access the program and their
data from anywhere with an Internet connection.
     Mathematica was a powerful and versatile software pro-
gram when it was released, and it remains so today. It has be-
come an essential tool for scientists, engineers, educators, and
other professionals in a plethora of fields. Its ability to perform
complex calculations and symbolic manipulation, as well as its
user-friendly interface and vast number of features, make it a
critical tool for solving a broad set of technical problems and
creating interactive visualizations and other content.




                               253
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

AutoCAD Replicated the Real World
AutoCAD is a computer-aided design (CAD) soft-
ware application developed and marketed by Autodesk, Inc.
The software was first released in 1982 as a desktop appli-
cation, and has since evolved to include a web and mobile
version. AutoCAD is widely used for creating 2D and 3D
designs in a variety of industries, including architecture, en-
gineering, and construction.
    The name “AutoCAD” is a portmanteau of “automatic” and
“CAD,” reflecting the software’s ability to automate the pro-
cess of creating technical drawings. The first version of Auto-
CAD was released in December 1982 and was initially only a
DOS application.
    AutoCAD quickly gained popularity in the architecture
and engineering fields, thanks to its ability to create accurate
and detailed technical drawings. The software was later made
available for Mac OS in 1992, and over the years, new versions
of AutoCAD have been released with added features and im-
provements to the user interface.
    One of the key features of AutoCAD is its parametric
drawing capabilities, which allow users to create and edit geo-
metric shapes and objects using mathematical parameters. This
allows for easy modification of designs and efficient reuse of
existing drawings. AutoCAD offers a wide range of tools for
creating and editing 3D models, including surfaces, solids, and
meshes. AutoCAD quickly became the go-to software for all
varieties of architectural and engineering projects.


                              254
                          Workstation Software




AutoCAD was first released on a floppy disk. Photo credit: Shaan Hurley,
                         CC BY 2.0 DEED


    AutoCAD also includes a number of advanced features
such as rendering, animation, and simulation tools. These fea-
tures allow users to create realistic visualizations of their de-
signs and to test and analyze the performance of their models.
In addition to its use in architecture and engineering, Au-
toCAD is also widely used in other industries, such as con-
struction, manufacturing, and product design. The software is
available in several versions, including AutoCAD LT (a 2D
only version which is less expensive), AutoCAD for Mac, and
AutoCAD Mobile.
                                  255
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    AutoCAD is popular around the world and has become
the industry standard for computer-aided design. The soft-
ware is available in a number of languages, including English,
German, French, Spanish, and Chinese. Autodesk also offers
a number of resources and training programs to help users get
the most out of the software. The software’s pricing is typically
on a subscription basis, with annual or monthly fees.
    To sum it up, AutoCAD is a powerful computer-aided de-
sign software that has revolutionized the way architects, engi-
neers, and other professionals create and edit technical draw-
ings. With its parametric drawing capabilities, 3D modeling
tools, and advanced features, AutoCAD is an essential tool for
professionals in a wide range of industries. The software’s open
licensing and flexibility has made it an industry standard for
computer-aided design, and it continues to evolve to meet the
needs of its users.


Revolutionizing Publishing with FrameMaker
FrameMaker is a popular desktop publishing soft-
ware that has been around for over three decades. Devel-
oped by Frame Technology Corporation, the software was
first released in 1986 and quickly gained popularity in the
publishing industry due to its advanced features and support
for multiple platforms. At the height of its popularity. Fram-
eMaker ran on over 13 Unix platforms.
    FrameMaker is a powerful tool that allows users to cre-
ate professional-quality documents, including books, tech-
nical manuals, and reports. It is particularly popular among

                              256
                         Workstation Software
technical writers, as it allows them to create complex technical
documents with ease. The software also supports the creation
of documents in multiple languages, making it an ideal choice
for organizations that operate in multiple countries.




The FrameMaker "about" screen before its acquisition by Adobe. Image
                          credit: Fair use


    One of the key features of FrameMaker is its support for
structured authoring. This allows users to create documents
using a structured markup language, such as XML or SGML.
This makes it easier to reuse content across multiple docu-
ments and also makes it easier to automatically generate differ-
ent versions of a document, such as a PDF or HTML version.
    FrameMaker also includes a variety of formatting and

                                257
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

layout tools, such as paragraph and character styles, tables, and
graphics. Users can also add interactive elements, such as hy-
perlinks and buttons, to their documents. FrameMaker sup-
ports the import and export of a large number of file formats,
including Microsoft Word, PDF, and HTML.
    In 1995, FrameMaker was acquired by Adobe Systems
and became known as Adobe FrameMaker. Under Adobe,
the software has seen several updates and improvements, in-
cluding enhanced support for web and mobile publishing, im-
proved collaboration tools, and integration with other Adobe
products such as Acrobat and InDesign.
    FrameMaker is available for both Windows and macOS
operating systems and is licensed on a perpetual or subscrip-
tion-based model. The software is used by many organizations,
from small businesses to large corporations and government
agencies. Some of its most famous applications and uses in-
clude creating aerospace and defense manuals, producing elec-
tronic books, and creating guides for software applications.
    FrameMaker is a powerful and versatile desktop pub-
lishing software that is popular among technical writers and
organizations that need to create professional-quality docu-
ments. With its support for structured authoring, formatting
and layout tools, and integration with other Adobe products,
FrameMaker continues to be a valuable tool for businesses and
organizations of all sizes.




                              258
PART 5
The Fall and
the Future
The Future of
Workstations
Could episodes of Black Mirror be our
future? Fair use.
                     The Future of Workstations




Modern Workstations
Where are workstations now, and where are they
going? Modern workstations—aka super-powerful, GPU-
equipped PCs—have quite a bit going for them, compared
to their early counterparts. They are equipped with powerful
hardware and advanced features that enable them to handle
demanding workloads, such as 3D rendering, video editing,
and scientific simulations.
    One of the key hardware specifications of a modern work-
station is its processor. Today’s workstations use Intel or AMD
processors that have a high number of cores and threads, al-
lowing them to handle multiple tasks simultaneously. These
processors also have a large amount of cache, which helps to
improve performance by reducing the number of times the
workstation must access the main memory.
    Another important hardware feature of modern worksta-
tions is the amount of memory available. Workstations typ-
ically have a large amount of RAM, which enables them to
handle large datasets and perform complex calculations. This
large amount of memory also helps to reduce the number of

                              265
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

times the workstation must access the storage, which can be a
bottleneck in performance.
   Modern workstations also have advanced storage options,
such as RAID. RAID, or Redundant Array of Independent
Disks, is a technology that allows workstations to use multiple
hard drives in parallel, improving performance and increasing
the availability of data. RAID systems can also provide data
redundancy, which can protect against data loss in case of a
disk failure.




Storage servers supporting large numbers of removable hard disks and
built-in hardware RAID controllers supporting various RAID levels.
        Photo credit: Open Grid Scheduler / Grid Engine, CC0


                                266
                     The Future of Workstations
    Workstations also have advanced disk setups, such as sol-
id-state drives (SSD) and NVMe drives, which offer faster
read and write speeds than traditional hard drives. This im-
proves the performance of the workstation and allows it to
access large datasets and perform complex calculations faster.
    Compared to the older workstations, such as Sun and
SGI, modern workstations have a significant amount of pow-
er available. Sun and SGI workstations were famous for their
high-performance and reliability, but they were also known for
their high cost and their proprietary hardware. Modern work-
stations use standard off-the-shelf hardware and have perfor-
mance far, far in excess of Sun and SGI workstations, and at a
much lower cost.


Where Are They Going?
Advancements in hardware and software contin-
ue to push the boundaries of what is possible with work-
stations. The development of faster processors, larger stor-
age capacity, and more advanced graphics capabilities have
greatly increased the computational power of workstations.
The potential of quantum computing is also a promising area
for the future of workstations. Quantum computing uses the
principles of quantum mechanics to perform calculations,
which allows for much faster and more efficient computa-
tions, solving some problems in seconds for which we would
need to wait a lifetime using a classical computer.
    The impact of artificial intelligence on workstations is also
an area of interest. The use of AI algorithms in workstations

                              267
                         SERIOUS MACHINES

can greatly enhance the capabilities of simulations and mod-
eling, leading to even more accurate predictions and designs.
    But these new technologies just scratch the surface. There
are several new computer architectures that are being researched
today. These new architectures are still in their infancy, and it’s
not clear which one or ones will become the industry standard.
However, they all have the potential to revolutionize the way
we use computers in the future. Let’s explore some of the types
of new architectures being contemplated for next generation
workstations and computers of all kinds.


Neuromorphic Computing
Neuromorphic computing is a relatively new and
exciting field that is gaining a lot of attention in the world of
computing. The term “neuromorphic” refers to the ability of
a computer system to mimic the way in which a human brain
forms and reforms connections. The goal of neuromorphic
computing is to create computers that can think and learn
like humans. This is being achieved through the development
of new computer architectures that are modeled after the
structure and function of the human brain.
    One of the key architectures responsible for the success of
AI and deep learning are artificial neural networks (ANNs).
These are structures that are usually implemented in computer
memory and are designed to approximate, at a coarse grained
level, the structure of the human brain. ANNs are made up of
layers of interconnected nodes or “neurons,” which are modeled
after the neurons in the brain. These neurons are connected to

                               268
                         The Future of Workstations
each other by “synapses,” which are modeled after the synapses
in the brain. The neurons and synapses work together to pro-
cess and transmit information in a manner similar to how the
brain carries out these functions. But implementing ANNs
in conventional computers is not the most efficient because
that’s not what general purpose processors were designed to
do. Neuromorphic processors change that.




A representation of an artifical neural network. Image credit: Glosser.ca,
                             CC BY-SA 3.0


                                  269
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    A key feature of neuromorphic computing is the use of
spiking neural networks (SNNs). These are neural networks
that use spike-based signaling, which is similar to the way
neurons in the brain communicate. SNNs are able to process
information in a more efficient way than traditional ANNs
running on conventional processors, and they are also able to
process information in real-time, which is important for appli-
cations like robotics and autonomous systems.
    One of the key advantages of neuromorphic computing is
its ability to process large amounts of data in real-time. This is
important for applications like image and speech recognition.
Neuromorphic computing is also well-suited for applications
that require low-power consumption, such as mobile devices
and IoT (Internet of Things) devices.
    Another advantage of neuromorphic computing is its abil-
ity to learn and adapt. Traditional computers rely on pre-pro-
grammed instructions, but neuromorphic computers can learn
and adapt to new situations. This is important for applications
like self-driving cars, where the computer needs to be able to
adapt to changing road conditions.
    There are several companies and organizations that are
working on neuromorphic computing, including IBM, Intel,
Qualcomm, and the European Union’s Human Brain Proj-
ect. IBM has been working on neuromorphic computing for
several years and has developed a neuromorphic chip called
TrueNorth, which is capable of simulating the behavior of 1
million neurons. Intel has also been working on neuromorphic
computing and has developed a neuromorphic chip called
Loihi, which is capable of simulating the behavior of 130,000

                               270
                      The Future of Workstations
neurons. These computers are advancing quickly but still have
a way to go. For comparison, there are about 100 billion neu-
rons in the human brain and 100 trillion synaptic connections.
   To sum it up, neuromorphic computing is a new and excit-
ing field that is still in its early stages of development. How-
ever, it has the potential to revolutionize the way we think
about computers and their capabilities. With the ability to
process large amounts of data in real-time, adapt and learn,
and consume less power, neuromorphic computing can enable
new applications in areas such as robotics, autonomous sys-
tems, image and speech recognition, and more. As the field
continues to develop and evolve, we can expect to see many
more exciting developments in the near future.


Quantum Computing
Quantum computing is a field of computer sci-
ence that is focused on developing new types of computers
that take advantage of the unique properties of quantum me-
chanics. These properties, such as superposition and entan-
glement, allow quantum computers to perform certain types
of calculations much faster than traditional computers.
    The basic building block of a quantum computer is the qu-
bit. Unlike a classical bit, which can be in one of two states (0
or 1), a qubit can be in a superposition of states. This means
that it can represent multiple values at the same time, allow-
ing for much more complex calculations to be performed
simultaneously.


                               271
                        SERIOUS MACHINES




IBM Q System One, a quantum computer with 20 superconducting qu-
          bits. Image credit: IBM Research, CC BY 2.0


    One of the key advantages of quantum computing is the
ability to perform certain types of calculations much faster
than traditional computers. For example, a quantum computer
can factorize large numbers exponentially faster than a classi-
cal computer. This has important implications for cryptogra-
phy and security, as many encryption algorithms rely on the
difficulty of factoring large numbers.
    Another key advantage of quantum computing is the abil-
ity to perform quantum simulations. This allows scientists to
model complex systems, such as molecules and materials, that
are difficult or impossible to study with traditional computers.

                              272
                     The Future of Workstations
This has important implications for fields such as chemistry,
materials science, and drug discovery.
    Despite these advantages, there are also significant chal-
lenges associated with quantum computing. One of the big-
gest challenges is decoherence, which occurs when the qubits
lose their quantum properties due to interactions with the en-
vironment. This can cause errors in calculations and make it
difficult to maintain the integrity of the qubits.
    Another challenge is the difficulty of building and main-
taining quantum computers. Because qubits are so delicate
and susceptible to decoherence, they must be kept at extremely
low temperatures and isolated from external interference. This
makes it difficult to create large-scale quantum computers that
are reliable and practical.
    Despite these challenges, researchers around the world are
making significant progress in the field of quantum comput-
ing. There are a number of companies and organizations that
are working on developing commercial quantum computers,
and several governments have also invested heavily in quan-
tum research.




                              273
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




A wafer of adiabatic quantum computers. Image credit: Steve Jurvetson,
                            CC BY 2.0


    Quantum computing is a rapidly developing field that has
the potential to revolutionize the way we think about comput-
ing. With its unique properties and ability to perform certain
types of calculations much faster than traditional computers,
it has important implications for fields such as cryptography,
security, and materials science. However, there are also sig-
nificant challenges associated with building and maintaining
quantum computers, and much work still needs to be done to
make them practical and reliable.




                                274
                      The Future of Workstations


Photonic Computing
Photonic Computing is an emerging field of com-
puter engineering that seeks to harness the power of light to
perform computational tasks. This technology is based on the
use of photons, the fundamental particles of light, to trans-
mit and process information. Photonic computing is being
researched as an alternative to traditional electronic comput-
ing, which relies on the movement of electrons to perform
computations. The goal of photonic computing is to create
faster, more powerful computing systems that are also energy
efficient.
    The use of light for computation is not a new concept. In
the 1960s, researchers began experimenting with optical com-
puting, which used light beams to perform calculations. How-
ever, these early attempts were hampered by the lack of tech-
nology for controlling and manipulating light beams. With
the advent of new technologies, such as lasers, fiber optics, and
photonic crystals, researchers have been able to make signifi-
cant progress in developing photonic computing.
    One of the main advantages of photonic computing comes
from the properties of light. After all, photons move at the
fastest possible speed anything can move in the universe - the
speed of light - as they have no mass. They can also travel
through a medium without producing heat. Electrons must
overcome all these complications.
    Photonic computers can also perform multiple calculations
simultaneously and do so potentially far more efficiently than

                               275
                           SERIOUS MACHINES

traditional computers. “It might be around 1,000 to 10,000
times faster,” says Nader Engheta, a professor of electrical and
systems engineering at the University of Pennsylvania. His
team of scientists engineered a microchip specifically for exe-
cuting matrix multiplication tasks such as those used for run-
ning neural networks. This task involves the multiplication of
number grids referred to as matrices in mathematics.
    Unlike traditional electronic devices that tackle these cal-
culations sequentially, the innovative optical device UPenn
developed is capable of processing all these computations si-
multaneously. This approach eliminates the need to retain in-
formation from intermediary stages in memory, according to
Engheta.




 A glass nanoparticle is suspended in an optical cavity. These mirrors or
optical elements form a cavity resonator for light waves. Image credit:
         James Millen (UCL Physics & Astronomy), CC BY 2.0



                                  276
                     The Future of Workstations
    Photonic computing also has the potential to be more en-
ergy-efficient than traditional electronic computing. Because
photons do not generate heat, photonic-based systems do
not require cooling systems, which can consume a significant
amount of energy. Photonic systems can be designed to be
more compact, which reduces the energy required to power
the system.
    Another advantage of photonic computing is its ability
to process and transmit data over longer distances. Photon-
ic systems can use optical fibers to transmit data, which can
cover much longer distances than traditional electronic sys-
tems. Photonic systems can be used to create high-speed data
links between computers, which can be used to connect data
centers, supercomputers, and other large-scale systems, such as
those found in the space industry.
    Despite the many advantages of photonic computing, there
are also several challenges that need to be overcome before this
technology can be widely adopted. One of the main challenges
is the cost of building and maintaining photonic-based sys-
tems. The components used in photonic systems, such as lasers
and photonic crystals, can be expensive to produce and diffi-
cult to integrate into existing systems. The technology is still
relatively new, and researchers are still working to improve the
performance and reliability of photonic-based systems.
    Photonic computing is a promising new field of computer
engineering that has the potential to revolutionize the way we
compute. With its high speed, energy efficiency, and ability to
process and transmit data over long distances, photonic com-
puting has the potential to create faster, more powerful, and

                              277
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

more efficient computing systems. However, more research and
development are needed to overcome the challenges of cost
and reliability before this technology can be widely adopted.


In-Memory Computing
In-memory computing has been around for a
while. Programmers know that RAM is thousands of times
faster than a disk, so whenever you need performance, you
might consider loading the data you’re working on into
RAM and keep it there while you’re working on it. But with
RAM now being abundant, the approach has been gaining
popularity as a technique that works at scale. There are even
companies like SAP that develop in-memory databases like
HANA, storing massive quantities of data where it can be
accessed fast.
    One of the key advantages of in-memory computing is its
speed. Accessing data stored in memory is much faster than
accessing data stored on disk. This is because memory is much
faster than disk storage, and data does not have to be retrieved
from a physical location on disk. This results in a significant
increase in performance, especially for applications that re-
quire real-time processing of large amounts of data.




                              278
                       The Future of Workstations




Consoles like this Xbox Series X may use in-memory computing to speed
      up game play.. Image credit: Der. Bellemer. CC BY-SA 4.0




                                279
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

     In-memory computing is also remotely related to the idea
of MemComputing. If you have all the data in RAM, might
as well bring the processing elements to the data rather than
move the in-memory data across the bus to the processor. This
idea really takes computation to the next level because it pro-
vides a more general purpose and powerful model with which
to scale computation compared to say, GPUs.
     In-memory computing can also enable new use cases and
business models. For example, real-time analytics can enable
new types of services, such as fraud detection, personalized
recommendations, and real-time inventory management.
     There are also some limitations to in-memory computing.
One of the main limitations is cost. In-memory computing
requires a large amount of memory, which can be expensive.
The cost of hardware and software can be high, and there may
be additional costs associated with data migration.
     Another limitation is that in-memory computing is not
suitable for all types of applications. Applications that do not
require real-time processing or that do not need to handle
large amounts of data may not see significant performance
benefits from in-memory computing.
     In-memory computing is also not a replacement for tradi-
tional disk-based storage systems. Data that is not frequently
accessed or that needs to be kept for a long period of time is
still best stored on disk.
     In-memory computing is a powerful technology that can
provide significant performance benefits for certain types of
applications. As the cost of memory continues to decrease and
the need for real-time processing of large amounts of data

                              280
                     The Future of Workstations
continues to increase, in-memory computing will likely be-
come an increasingly important technology.


Approximate Computing
Approximate computing is a new computing para-
digm that allows for the trade-off of computational accu-
racy for improved performance and energy efficiency. This
approach is becoming increasingly important as the demand
for more powerful and energy-efficient computing systems
continues to grow.
    One of the key benefits of approximate computing is that
it can significantly reduce the power consumption of a system,
allowing for longer battery life in mobile devices and reduc-
ing the energy costs associated with data centers. Approximate
computing can also improve the performance of a system by
allowing for the use of lower precision data types and reducing
the number of computational operations required to solve a
problem.
    One example of approximate computing is the use of
low-precision data types in deep learning neural networks.
Traditional deep learning networks use 32-bit floating-point
data types, which are highly accurate but also consume a lot
of power. By using lower precision data types, such as 16-bit
or 8-bit integers, the power consumption of the network can
be significantly reduced while still maintaining a high level of
accuracy.
    Another example of approximate computing is the use of
approximate algorithms to solve problems. These algorithms

                              281
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

are designed to produce approximate solutions that are close
to the exact solution, but are significantly faster and more en-
ergy-efficient. One example of this is the use of approximate
algorithms in the field of computational finance, where ap-
proximate solutions can be used to quickly price financial de-
rivatives, where the price of a financial contract is dependent
on another underlying financial asset.
    One of the hot trends in AI these days is 1-bit or “bina-
rized” neural networks, where all the neurons output either
a one or a zero. It’s been shown that these networks can run
much faster than traditional ANNs where floating point num-
bers are used, and they do so without losing too much of the
accuracy required. This is another form of approximate com-
puting that can be implemented in a general purpose fashion
to almost all tasks that neural networks and deep learning is
used for today.
    Approximate computing is also being used in the field of
bioinformatics, where it is used to analyze large amounts of
genetic data. Approximate algorithms can be used to quick-
ly identify patterns in the data and make predictions about
the genetic makeup of an individual. Another example is in
video transmission, where frame dropping may be acceptable,
as it will not be detectable by the viewer. It may go without
saying, but for any critical operations, where accuracy matters,
approximate computing is not the right choice.
    Approximate computing is a promising way of imple-
menting performant systems that allows for the trade-off of
computational accuracy for improved performance and ener-
gy efficiency. It is being used in a variety of fields, including

                              282
                     The Future of Workstations
deep learning, finance, and bioinformatics to solve problems
quickly and efficiently. As the demand for more powerful and
energy-efficient computing systems continues to grow, ap-
proximate computing will become increasingly important in
the future.


RISC-V Architecture
The RISC-V architecture is a new, open-source de-
sign for computer processors that has the potential to enable
a wide range of new innovations and low-cost products. The
architecture is based on the Reduced Instruction Set Com-
puter (RISC) principle, which emphasizes simple and effi-
cient instruction sets to improve performance. This architec-
ture is different from the traditional closed-source designs of
processors like ARM and Intel, which are proprietary and
controlled by a single company. As a side note, the “V” is the
Roman numeral for five, which is how many generations of
the RISC architecture have been developed by UC-Berkeley
since 1981.
    One of the key benefits of the RISC-V architecture is its
open-source nature. This allows for a large number of com-
panies, organizations, and individuals to contribute to the
development and evolution of the architecture. It also allows
for greater transparency and collaboration in the development
process. Because the architecture is open-source, it is not tied
to any specific company or vendor, which means that it can
be used in products and applications without the need to pay
licensing fees.

                              283
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    The RISC-V architecture is designed to be highly flexi-
ble and customizable, which means that it can be used in a
variety of products and applications. This includes everything
from low-power IoT devices to high-performance servers and
supercomputers. The architecture is designed to be scalable,
which means that it can be easily adapted to different perfor-
mance requirements and power budgets.
    There are a number of different operating systems that
can run on the RISC-V architecture, including Linux, BSD,
and FreeRTOS. Companies like SiFive, Western Digital, and
Google are already manufacturing RISC-V processors, with
many more expected to join the market in the near future.
    In terms of performance, the RISC-V architecture is ex-
pected to be competitive with other architectures, like ARM
and Intel. While the architecture is still relatively new and has
not yet been widely adopted, initial benchmarks have shown
that it has the potential to deliver similar or better perfor-
mance than other architectures in certain applications.




                              284
                      The Future of Workstations




 RISC-V processor prototype from 2013. Image credit: Public domain


    The licensing process for RISC-V is relatively simple and
straightforward. The architecture is governed by the RISC-V
Foundation, which has a set of guidelines and rules for using
the architecture. In general, companies and individuals can
use the architecture without paying any licensing fees, as long
as they comply with the guidelines and rules set forth by the
foundation.




                               285
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    There are a number of RISC-V based boards already avail-
able from a variety of online marketplaces. Prices run from
under $10 to $40-50. I’ve personally tried the Libre Computer
boards (pictured below) which cost only $35 in the first half
of 2024. I’ve enjoyed using these with Linux. It’s true that the
level of support for drivers and Linux programs is not compa-
rable to the ARM architecture, but progress is occurring fast.




Libre Computer RISC-V based board. Image credit: Libre Computer
                          Project


    The RISC-V architecture is an exciting new development
in the world of computer processors. Its open-source nature
has the potential to enable a wide range of new innovations
and low-cost products. With its flexibility, scalability, and
competitive performance, it is likely that we will see a growing
number of products and applications that use this architecture
in the years to come.

                              286
Where Are
They Now?
In 1983, 700,000 Atari video game
cartridges and consoles were buried
in a landfill in New Mexico. In 2014,
the site was excavated. Photo credit:
Taylorhatmaker, CC BY 2.0.
                        Where Are They Now?




IBM
In 2005, IBM announced that it would be selling
its PC and desktop workstation business to Lenovo, a Chi-
nese computer manufacturer. This decision was met with sur-
prise and confusion from many in the tech industry, as IBM
had long been a leader in the PC and workstation market.
However, there were several reasons behind IBM’s decision.
    One of the main reasons was the changing market for
workstations. In the early 2000s, the market for workstations
had become increasingly competitive, with many companies
offering similar products at lower prices. IBM had been strug-
gling to compete in this market, as its workstations were typi-
cally more expensive than those of its competitors. In addition,
the market for workstations was becoming increasingly com-
moditized, with more companies offering similar products and
features.




                              291
                           SERIOUS MACHINES




Though out of the traditional workstation market, IBM is a forerunner in
quantum computing. The IBM Condor, unveiled in 2023, is a 1,121-qubit
           quantum processor. Image credit: IBM. Fair use


    Another reason for IBM’s decision to sell its workstation
business was a shift in the company’s overall strategy. IBM
made the decision to focus more on its software and services
business and less on its hardware business. The company saw
that the workstation market was becoming increasingly com-
petitive and that it would be difficult to continue to compete
in this market while also investing in its other business areas.
    IBM also saw an opportunity. At the time, Lenovo was a
growing player in the global PC market, and IBM saw an op-
portunity to expand its own presence in the China market by
partnering with a strong local company. The deal also allowed
IBM to focus on its core competencies, while Lenovo could
leverage its existing relationships to grow the business in new
markets.


                                  292
                        Where Are They Now?
    In addition, IBM’s workstation business was not particu-
larly profitable. As a result, selling the unit to Lenovo was a
way for IBM to free up resources and focus on more profitable
areas of the company.
    IBM’s decision to sell its workstation business was driv-
en by a combination of factors, including a changing market
for workstations, a shift in the company’s overall strategy, and
an opportunity to expand its presence in the Chinese mar-
ket. While it was a surprise move at the time, it ultimately
allowed IBM to focus on its core competencies and continue
to grow as a company. Today, IBM continues to be a leader in
the mainframe and emerging computing platforms markets.


Sun Microsystems
As we saw earlier, Sun Microsystems was a com-
puter technology company that was founded in 1982 by
Andy Bechtolsheim, Vinod Khosla, Scott McNealy, and Bill
Joy. The company quickly gained a reputation for produc-
ing high-performance workstations and servers, which were
based on its own SPARC microprocessor architecture.
    Sun’s early success was built on the popularity of its Unix-
based operating system, Solaris, which was widely used in
academic and research institutions, as well as in the financial
and telecommunications industries. The company’s worksta-
tions, such as the SPARCstation and the Ultra series, were
also highly sought-after for their power and reliability.
    In the late 1990s and early 2000s, Sun expanded its prod-
uct line to include a wide range of hardware and software

                              293
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

products, including storage systems, software development
tools, and even consumer products such as digital cameras. The
company also made a number of strategic acquisitions, includ-
ing the purchase of software companies such as StarDivision
(known for StarOffice, a less expensive option than Microsoft
Office) and SeeBeyond (real-time information flow software),
as well as the acquisition of hardware companies like Afara
Websystems and Kealia.
    Despite these efforts, Sun struggled to maintain its posi-
tion as a leading technology company in the face of increased
competition from companies like Dell, HP, and IBM. In ad-
dition, the company was hit hard by the dot-com bust of the
early 2000s, which led to a decline in demand for its products
and services.
    In 2003, Scott McNealy stepped down as CEO and was
replaced by Jonathan Schwartz. Under Schwartz’s leadership,
the company shifted its focus away from hardware and towards
software and services, with the aim of becoming a leading pro-
vider of open-source software and cloud computing services.
    However, these efforts were not enough to turn the com-
pany around, and in 2008, Sun Microsystems was acquired by
Oracle Corporation for $7.4 billion. The acquisition was seen
as a way for Oracle to expand its presence in the server and
storage market, and to gain access to Sun’s portfolio of soft-
ware and services.




                             294
                          Where Are They Now?




Co-founder of Oracle, Larry Ellison, and an Oracle Exadata from 2009.
    Image credit: Oracle Corporate Communications, CC BY 2.0



                                295
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

    The acquisition of Sun by Oracle marked the end of an era
for the company, which had once been a major player in the
technology industry. While some of Sun’s hardware and soft-
ware products continue to be used today, the company is no
longer an independent entity, and its legacy lives on primarily
through the continued development and use of its open-source
software offerings, such as OpenSolaris, OpenOffice, and Java.
    The two last remaining SPARC processor manufacturers
were Oracle and Fujitsu, both of whom have announced they
will be ceasing further development of this architecture. There
will be no new SPARC-powered hardware once these deci-
sions are implemented.


SGI
Silicon Graphics Inc. (SGI) was a leading comput-
er technology company that specialized in high-performance
computing and visualization systems. Founded in 1981, the
company quickly established itself as a leader in the field of
computer graphics, providing cutting-edge technology to in-
dustries such as entertainment, manufacturing, and scientific
research.
    SGI’s early success can be attributed to its innovative hard-
ware designs, particularly the use of high-end graphics pro-
cessing units (GPUs) and proprietary operating systems. The
company’s flagship product, the IRIS workstation, was a pow-
erful and versatile machine that could handle complex graph-
ics and scientific simulations with ease.
    In the 1990s, SGI’s focus shifted towards the development

                              296
                        Where Are They Now?
of supercomputers, as the company aimed to capture a larg-
er share of the high-performance computing market. The
company’s Cray T3E and Origin 2000 systems were popular
choices for academic and research institutions and were used
to perform a wide range of simulations and calculations.
     However, by the early 2000s, SGI was facing intense com-
petition from other high-performance computing companies,
such as IBM, HP, and Dell. The company’s hardware business
struggled to adapt to the changing market, and SGI’s financial
performance began to decline.
     In addition to increased competition, SGI also faced chal-
lenges related to the rapid advancement of technology. The
emergence of commodity hardware and open-source software
made it difficult for SGI to maintain its position as a leader
in high-performance computing. The company’s proprietary
operating system, IRIX, was also becoming increasingly out-
dated, as users preferred the more widely used Linux.
     In an effort to turn the company around, SGI made a stra-
tegic decision to shift its focus towards software and services.
The company began to develop and sell software products that
could run on industry-standard hardware, rather than relying
on its own proprietary systems. SGI also began to offer con-
sulting and support services to its customers.
     Despite these efforts, SGI continued to struggle financial-
ly, and in 2009, the company filed for bankruptcy. After several
years of financial turmoil, Silicon Graphics Inc. was eventually
acquired by Rackable Systems, which rebranded the company
as SGI.



                              297
                         SERIOUS MACHINES




SGI Prism Extreme was part of the SGI Prism series which released in
          2005. Image credit: Kitmondo NET, CC BY 2.0



                               298
                        Where Are They Now?
    Today, as a small and forgotten part of Rackable, which it-
self is a small and forgotten part of HPE, the name lingers on
bearing no relation at all to the IRIX running, MIPS powered
workstations of yesteryear.
    SGI was a pioneering company in the field of high-per-
formance computing, known for its innovative hardware and
software solutions. However, the company struggled to adapt
to the changing market conditions and rapid advancement of
technology, eventually leading to its decline and acquisition.
Even though the SGI of old is no more, its technology con-
tinues to exist in the form of the graphics library OpenGL, the
virtual reality markup language (VRML). Many SGI systems
continue to power medical and industrial equipment across
the world—the last surviving remnants of a company that was
once the hottest brand from Silicon Valley.


Dec
The DEC Alpha was a microprocessor architec-
ture developed by Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in
the early 1990s. The Alpha was designed to be a high-perfor-
mance, 64-bit processor that could compete with other high-
end microprocessors of the time, such as the IBM PowerPC
and the Sun UltraSPARC.
    One of the key features of the Alpha architecture was its
support for a 64-bit address space, which allowed it to access
much larger amounts of memory than 32-bit processors. This
made the Alpha well suited for use in high-end servers, work-
stations, and supercomputers.

                              299
                       SERIOUS MACHINES

   DEC first introduced the Alpha in 1992 with the Alpha
21064, which was a microprocessor based on the DEC 21164
core. This was followed by the Alpha 21066 and 21068, which
were pin-compatible with the 21064 but offered higher clock
speeds.
   In the mid-1990s, DEC released the Alpha 21264, which
was based on a new core design and offered even higher per-
formance. The 21264 was used in several high-end systems,
such as the DEC AlphaServer 8400 and the Compaq Alpha-
Server 8200.




     The DEC AlphaServer 2000. Image credit: Public domain


                             300
                        Where Are They Now?
    Despite its technical advantages, the Alpha struggled to
gain a foothold in the market. One of the main reasons for this
was the lack of software support, as many popular operating
systems and applications were not available for the Alpha. The
Alpha was also relatively expensive compared to other high-
end processors, which made it less attractive to buyers.
    In the late 1990s, DEC’s financial troubles and the rise of
x86-based processors led to the decline of the Alpha. In 1998,
Compaq acquired DEC and decided to phase out the Alpha
in favor of x86-based systems. The last Alpha-based systems
were sold in 2001, and support for the Alpha was officially
discontinued in 2007.
    Despite its short lifespan, the DEC Alpha played an im-
portant role in the development of high-end microprocessors.
Its support for a 64-bit address space and high performance
made it a popular choice for use in scientific and engineering
applications. The Alpha’s architecture served as the basis for
several other microprocessors, such as the HP PA-RISC and
the MIPS R10000. The DEC Alpha will always be remem-
bered as a significant step forward in computer architecture
and technology.
    Compaq was acquired by HP, now HPE, in 2002. More
than any other single company, HPE is the owner of much of
the intellectual property from the golden age of workstations.
Apollo, DEC, SGI, Cray and HP’s own workstations are all
now part of HPE. It wouldn’t be wrong to say that, in the end,
the two greatest mausoleums of the workstation revolution
stand at Oracle and HPE.



                              301
Conclusion
A possible Higgs Boson event? This data tape
was part of a campaign to support the CERN
& Society Foundation. Each tape contains 8.5
Terabytes of LHC data. Image credit: Amir
Husain.
                            Conclusion




Workstations have revolutionized the way we
approach engineering and science. These powerful computa-
tional tools have allowed for more accurate predictions and
better designs, leading to a new era of innovation in many
fields. From the early days of the computer to the latest ad-
vancements in hardware and software, workstations have
continually evolved to meet the changing needs of engineers
and scientists. While the RISC-based, Unix powered cus-
tom workstations of yesteryear are no more, the future of
workstation computing looks promising. The essence of a
workstation has always been to equip a single highly-trained
worker with massive, dedicated computing power. The un-
derlying technologies that carry forward this idea are indeed
evolving, with advancements in quantum computing and ar-
tificial intelligence offering even more potential for discovery
and innovation.
     Let’s go back to that movie theater in 1991, when Termi-
nator 2: Judgment Day was playing on the big screen. You were
sure nothing could ever be better. You not only saw it in the
theater, you waited in anticipation for it to come out on video
so you could hurry to the local Blockbuster and rent the VHS

                              305
                        SERIOUS MACHINES

tape of it. Sure, it didn’t look nearly as good on your 22” CRT
television, but if you needed to go to the bathroom, you could
pause it and not miss a single amazing effect. Those were ex-
citing times indeed.
    Now fast forward to today. Nearly every piece of media you
see, whether it’s on Netflix, PBS, or some teenager’s YouTube
channel, harnesses the advanced power of computing. Home
users running Linux on Raspberry Pis are able to analyze seg-
ments of DNA strands. Pop culture fanatics can record, edit,
and publish videos in hours with software that boggles the
mind. Smartphones today are nearly one thousand times faster
than the Cray-2 Supercomputer from the mid-80s. The least
expensive PC on the market can still be used for gaming and
animation (though granted, the “slow” speed may frustrate us-
ers). We, as users, have endless possibilities at the tips of our
fingers, and each day, it’s only improving. What’s coming next
year? Five years from now? I know I can’t wait to find out!




                              306
           About the Author




Amir Husain is a serial entrepreneur, AI technol-
ogist, and author based in Austin, Texas. He has received
widespread acclaim for his pioneering work, including Aus-
tin’s Top Entrepreneur award and inclusion in Austin’s 40
Under 40. His ventures have been lauded with CNBC’s fast-
est growing company awards and numerous other interna-
tional recognitions.
    Amir currently serves as the Chairman of WorldQuant
Predictive, SpecFive, a mesh networking company, and Nav-
igate, a decentralized data platform. He also serves on the
University of Texas at Austin’s President’s Advisory Board, the
Advisory Board of the Department of Computer Science, and
the Board of Global Venture Bridge, fostering international
entrepreneurial collaboration.
    Amir founded the defense technology company SGS,
chaired by former Deputy Secretary of Defense, Robert Work,
and served as Founder, CEO, and Board Director of SkyGrid,
a joint venture with Boeing.
    An avid inventor, Amir has been awarded over 30 patents
in AI and distributed systems. He has served on NATO’s
Innovation Advisory Board. His work has been featured in
world-leading publications such as the BBC, Fortune, Forbes,
and Proceedings from the U.S. Naval Institute.
    Under Amir’s leadership, SparkCognition achieved a uni-
corn valuation, marking a significant milestone in its jour-
ney. As the Founder and Executive Board Member of this
award-winning AI company, Amir led the firm from its incep-
tion until the end of 2023.
    He is the author of the best-selling books The Sentient Ma-
chine, Generative Art, and Generative AI for Leaders. He is a
co-author of Hyperwar: Conflict and Competition in the AI Cen-
tury and is a regular contributor to Forbes.
