contents

FOREWORD by Jacob Ward
INTRODUCTION by Doug Cantor
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK


001 Put Together a Soldering Kit
002 Learn Soldering Basics
003 Study Circuit Components
004 Build a Circuit
005 Choose a Microcontroller
006 Program an Arduino
007 Know Basic Woodworking Tools
008 Make a Straight Cut in Wood
009 Master Woodworking Joints
010 Drill a Hole
011 Suit Up with Metalworking Tools
012 Cut Metal Pipes and Sheets
013 Learn to Weld
GEEK TOYS
014 You Built What?! The Ultimate All-in-One Beer-Brewing
   Machine
015 Drink Booze from a Melon
016 Break into Your Beer
017 Install a Shower Beer Caddy
018 Chill Your Beer Really, Really Fast
019 Disguise Your Brew
020 Reuse Those Red Party Cups
021 You Built What?! The Drink-Slinging Droid
022 Serve Shots in Jell-O Cups
023 Make Drinks Glow in the Dark
024 Freeze LEGO Ice Cubes
025 Cook a Hot Dog with Electrical Current
026 Mod Your Toaster for Far-from-Average Toast
027 Wield a Potato Launcher
028 Improvise a Planetarium
029 Put On a Liquid Light Show
030 Jam Out to a Sound-Reactive Light Box
031 Wave an LED Lighter at a Concert
032 Party with an LED Glow Stick
033 You Built What?! An LED-Lit Disco Dance Floor
034 Make a Sonic Tunnel of Fire
035 Turn Your Campfire Green
036 Hold a Flaming Ball in Your Bare Hand
037 Set Off a Spinning Fire Tornado
038 Ignite a Homemade Sparkler
039 Wreak Havoc with the Ultimate Squirt Gun
040 Make a Mini Catapult
041 Play with a Bike-Part Spirograph
042 Turn Junk Mail into Pencils
043 Set Up a Turntable Zoetrope
044 You Built What?! The Real Iron Man Suit
045 Mix Magnetic Silly Putty
046 Cook Up Ferrofluid
047 Catch a Thrill on a Backyard Coaster
048 Set Up a Pinball Game at Home
049 Play DIY Skee-Ball
050 Build a Mint-Tin Racer
051 Shake Up a Martini in a Mint Tin
052 Strum a Mint-Tin Guitar
053 Carry a Pocket Billiard Set
054 Build a Mini Arcade Game
055 Cinch a Nintendo-Controller Belt
056 Set Up a Supersize Game of Operation
057 Play Giant Checkers
058 Make a Reflection Hologram
059 Wield a DIY Light Saber
060 Hack Your Magic 8 Ball
061 Go Anywhere with Virtual-Reality Glasses
062 File-Share with a USB Dead Drop
063 Build a Bristlebot
064 Make a Mini Whirling Motor
065 Rig an Animatronic Hand
066 You Built What?! The Electric Giraffe
067 Create Audio Art out of Cassette Tape
068 Scratch a Pizza-Box Turntable
069 Pirate a Vinyl Record
070 Craft a Boom Box Duffel Bag
071 Make Your Tie Glow in the Dark
072 Put Headphones in Your Hoodie
073 Use a Glove on a Touchscreen
074 Pump Jams through an Old-School Phonograph
075 Amplify Music with Paper Cups
076 Make Custom-Fit Earbuds
077 Put a New Spin on an Old CD
078 Get Your Air Drum On with Electrified Drumsticks
079 Amuse Yourself with a Flipperdinger
080 Play a Pocket Theremin
HOME IMPROVEMENTS
081 Customize Your Welcome Mat
082 Organize Your Entryway with Recycled Cans
083 Give a Doorknob a New Spin
084 Set Up a Secret Door
085 Make Invisible Speakers
086 Monitor Your Home with a Laser Security System
087 Snooper-Proof Your Wallet
088 Install an Electrical-Outlet Wall Safe
089 Carry a Film-Roll Keychain
090 Make a Musical Stash for Your Cash
091 Turn Your HDTV Into a Magic Window
092 Craft a DIY Digital Photo Frame
093 Give an Old TV a Rerun
094 Hack the Perfect Gaming Chair
095 Make a TV Oscilloscope
096 Hack a TV Console into a Seat
097 Install an Aquarium in an Old TV
098 Build a Boob-Tube Bar
099 Set Up a DIY Drive-in
100 Hang a Liquid Lamp
101 Mold a Retro Lamp Base
102 Create a Mesmerizing Persistence-of-Vision Clock
103 Tell Time with a Dart Clock
104 Make a Modern Mag Rack
105 Sew an Easy eBook Reader Case
106 Turn a Printer into a High-Volume Document Shredder
107 Sort Mail with Old CDs
108 Improvise a Postage Scale
109 Turn Your Roomba into a Sentry
110 Make a Robotic Artiste
111 Remove Rust with Electricity
112 Clean with a Toy-Car Broom
113 Rig a Superpowered Scrub Brush
114 Track Your Food’s Freshness
115 Mod a Crumb-Collecting Cutting Board
116 Harvest Fridge Magnets from an Old Hard Drive
117 Do Stuff with Bottle Caps
118 Avoid Burning Your Mouth with a Smart Coaster
119 Put an Old Coffee Can to Good Use
120 You Built What?! Dinner to Go in a Nitrous-Injected Dining
   Table
121 Improvise a Sous-Vide Cooker
122 Build a DIY Smoker
123 Set Up an Umbrella Solar Cooker
124 Construct a Toilet-Powered Zen Fountain
125 Double Your Showerhead Action
126 Craft a Toilet-Paper Dispenser
127 Hang a Magnetic Stud Finder
128 Turn Your Hard Drive into a Tool Grinder
129 Capture Screws with a Magnetic Wristband
130 Rig the Poor Man’s Laser Level
131 Kit Out an Instant-Charge Screwdriver
132 Make a Mini Screwdriver
133 Remove a Stripped Screw with a Rubber Band
134 Make a Rubik’s Cube–Inspired Chest of Drawers
135 Sand Tiny Trim with a Razor
136 Make Duct Tape Do Double Duty
137 Create a Life-Size Cardboard Cutout
138 Lounge in a Cardboard Hammock
139 Chat on a Cardboard Telephone
140 Hang Up Cardboard Blinds
141 You Built What?! Man’s Best Friend Gets a High-Tech Home
142 Make an Automatic Pet Feeder
143 Build a Cat Door
144 Put Together a Homemade Wind Mill
145 Hook Up a Solar Charger
146 Make a Geodesic Dome out of PVC Pipe
147 Reuse an Old Garden Hose
148 Make the Lazy Man’s Mower
149 Set Up DIY Grow Lights
150 Build a CD-Case Greenhouse
151 You Built What?! The Ultimate Snowblower




GADGET UPGRADES
152 Rig a DIY Polygraph Test
153 Listen In with a Foxhole Radio
154 Tack Up a Dipole Antenna
155 Craft a Cell-Phone “Cantenna”
156 Boost Wi-Fi with a Steamer
157 Hang HDTV-Antenna Art
158 Mod an Xbox 360 Controller into an iPhone Case
159 Make a Phone “Bounceable”
160 Build a Hands-Free Phone
161 Make a Remote Display for Your Computer
162 Rig a Smartphone Projector
163 Charge a Phone with Solar Rays
164 Make a Smartphone Tripod
165 Turn Your Old Netbook into a Touchscreen Tablet
166 Fashion a DIY Stylus for Your Touchscreen Device
167 Protect Your Touchscreen with Thin Vinyl
168 Stash a Flash Drive in a Cassette
169 Make a Pink-Eraser Flash Drive
170 Fake It with a Sawed-Off Flash Drive
171 House a Flash Drive in a LEGO
172 Hack a Foot-Operated Mouse
173 Trick Out Your Computer Tower with Engraving
174 Turn Your Laptop into a Whiteboard
175 Dye Your Laptop
176 Make a Steampunk-Inspired Laptop Case
177 Turn On Your Computer with a Magnet Switch
178 Print Secrets with Invisible Ink
179 Fake Out Thieves with a Desktop Hack
180 Shield Your Screen from Prying Eyes
181 Set Up a Laptop Cooling System
182 Control Your Mouse from Afar
183 Make an External Hard Drive
184 Add Keyboard Thumbtacks
185 Rig a Superportable Keyboard
186 Create a Glowing Mousepad
187 Upcycle an Old Circuit Board
188 Make a Laptop Stand from a Binder
189 Build a USB Hub into Your Desk
190 Stash Your Printer in a Drawer
191 Mount Stuff behind Your Monitor
192 Organize Loose Cables
193 Make a Floppy-Disk Box
194 Get Pumped with a CD Dumbbell
195 Assemble a Cereal-Box Spectrometer
196 Rig a Supersimple Radiation Detector
197 Set Up a Plasma Globe Inside a Simple Lightbulb
198 Illuminate Sketches with Homemade Conductive Ink
199 Hack Infrared Goggles
200 Decimate Stuff with a DIY Laser Cutter
201 You Built What?! A 3D Printer That Runs on Sun and Sand
202 Shine a Mini Flashlight
203 Brighten Up a Standard-Issue Flashlight
204 Beam a Batman-Style Spotlight
205 Repurpose Foil for Techie Use
206 Improvise a Tripod
207 Mount a Camera to Your Bike
208 Build a Time-Lapse Camera Stand
209 Rig a Plastic-Bottle Diffuser
210 Make Your Camera Waterproof
211 Create a Peephole Fisheye Lens
212 Adapt a Manual Lens to Your DSLR
213 Snap a Self-Portrait with a DIY Remote Shutter Release
214 Set Up a High-Speed Audio-Triggered Flash
215 You Built What?! A Camera That Shoots Huge Photographs




THINGS THAT GO
216 Ride with a Grease-Free Pant Leg
217 Reinforce Your Tire with a Seat Belt
218 Stay Safe with a Beer-View Mirror
219 Keep Your Handlebar Grips Tight
220 Bring the Party with a Bike Speaker
221 Stay Warm on Chilly Rides
222 Make a Unicycle Out of a Bike
223 Navigate with an Old-Fashioned GPS
224 Make Your Bike’s Tires Snow Proof
225 Protect Your Bike Saddle from Theft
226 Reuse a Busted Bike Tube
227 Shred on a Fan-Propelled Skateboard
228 Give Your Motorcycle a Futuristic Vibe
229 Light Up Your Motorcycle Helmet
230 You Built What?! The Vrooming Hot-Rod Hauler
231 Mount a Rad Hood Ornament
232 Hang a DIY Air Freshener
233 Black Out Your Taillights
234 Install Air Horns in Your Car
235 Fend Off Fender Benders with a Sonic Distance Sensor
236 Hack an Emergency USB Charger
237 Shift with a Custom Gear Knob
238 Build a Bed in Your Van
239 Rig a Camping Shower
240 Kit Out a Solar-Charging Messenger Bag
241 Stay Cool On the Go with Ad Hoc A/C
242 Refill a Tiny Toothpaste Tube
243 Assemble a Collapsible Travel Hanger
244 Give Your Suitcase the Gift of Wheels
245 Pack Your Razor Safely
246 Take Aerial Photos with a Weather Balloon
247 Make a Mini Hovercraft
248 Launch a Mini Rocket
249 Build a Better Canoe Paddle
250 Upgrade Your Kayak into a Sailboat
251 You Built What?! The Incredible Amphibious Tank
252 Hack an Oversize Air Hockey Puck
253 Score with Ping-Pong Paddle Gloves
254 Assemble a PVC-Pipe Soccer Goal
255 Transform a Bike into a B-Ball Hoop
256 Serve Up a Tennis Ball
257 Turn Your Backyard into a Badminton Court
258 Make a Mini-Golf Course
259 Install an At-Home Rock Wall
260 Hang PVC Fitness Rings
261 You Built What?! A Tilting Ping-Pong Table That Throws Off
   Opponents
262 Organize Cords On the Go
263 Run in No-Slip Shoes
264 You Built What?! The Motorized Easy Chair


GLOSSARY
INDEX
THANKS TO OUR MAKERS
IMAGE CREDITS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
DISCLAIMER
FOREWORD




Anyone can make anything. That is the lesson of the 140 years
that Popular Science has been in print. A determined person,
working on the weekends, can escape gravity, break the speed of
sound, or create a new means of communicating across great
distances. And that inventive process begins by tearing things
apart and rebuilding them again.

I cannot claim to have been the kind of kid who did that. My
instincts around technology were always to keep my belongings
clean, dry, and otherwise in perfect working order, not to dismantle
or modify them. But my years at Popular Science have taught me
that that instinct is the wrong one. There is simply too much
technology at our disposal not to mess around with it. And when a
determined person brings his or her inventive instincts to bear on
the gadgets and gizmos that fill our lives, great things can result.

But this book isn’t necessarily about building great things. It’s
about messing around, usually for the simple fun of it. The projects
on these pages are based, in part, on the years we’ve spent
pursuing the lone, sometimes crazed hackers who don’t just
modify technology but blow it apart, just to be able to say they’ve
done it.

I spent an afternoon with our staff photographer, John Carnett,
who in his off time had replaced the motor on a four-wheel ATV
with a jet engine. The thing required an elaborate start-up
procedure and ear protection just to get it rolling, and as he drove
me through his Philadelphia neighborhood in it, I cringed to
imagine the incredible racket we were making, essentially that of a
747 taxiing past. And yet throughout the process, oblivious to the
enemies he was making among the local parents, dogs, and
nappers, John wore a look of joy and pride that had nothing to do
with serving humanity or inventing something new. He’d just
tricked something out—hacked it—in his own way, and in doing so
had made his mark on the universe, not to mention on the
neighborhood noise ordinances.

It’s in that spirit that we, and especially our tireless senior editor
Doug Cantor, bring you this entertaining collection of projects. We
did it for the hell of it.




Jacob Ward
Editor-in-Chief
Popular Science
INTRODUCTION




I was an unlikely candidate to become the editor of How 2.0,
Popular Science’s do-it-yourself column. I’ve always been
reasonably handy, but when it came to real hands-dirty, open-
things-up-and-rearrange-the-parts hacking skills, I was a complete
novice.

So I got into the DIY world the same way an experienced DIYer
would work on a project: I did some research, talked to seasoned
tinkerers, and then dove in. Early on I managed to build a tiny
flashlight, hack my cell phone’s firmware, and make a pair of
bookends from old CDs, all without causing too much damage.
Over time I found that with a few hours, a small pile of parts from
Radio Shack, and a little patience, I could build some really cool
stuff.
Editing How 2.0 has also given me a window into the vast
community of smart, dedicated people who have found about a
million uses for things like solenoid valves and Arduino
microcontrollers. The breadth of their innovations is truly
astonishing, and that’s what Popular Science has tried to show in
the pages of How 2.0 each month. We’ve featured projects
ranging from a remote-controlled helicopter only 2 inches (5 cm)
high to a remote-controlled bomber with a 20-foot (60-m)
wingspan; from a portable solar-powered gadget charger to a 200-
pound (90-kg) solar-powered 3-D printer; from a robot built from a
toothbrush head to one that can mix and serve cocktails.

Many of these projects have found their way into this book, along
with a host of entirely new ones. A few of them are just amazing,
audacious things that almost no one could (or probably should) try.
Most, though, are easier to replicate. Some take only a few
minutes and require little more than gluing parts together.

So if you’ve never attempted to make anything before in your life,
this book provides plenty of ways to start. From there you can take
on some of the more challenging projects and develop new skills.
Eventually, you might actually find yourself advancing your
projects far beyond the versions in the book.

Whatever your skill level and area of interest, I encourage you to
roll up your sleeves and (safely) give one of these projects a shot.
At times you may get frustrated or even break something. But
ultimately you’ll be surprised by what you can make, hack, tweak,
improve, and transform—and by how much fun you’ll have doing
it.




Doug Cantor
Senior Editor
Popular Science
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
So you want to hack stuff—to tear it apart, put it back together with
other components, and make it new. We at Popular Science salute
you, and we’ve put together these projects to get you started.
Many of them come from our popular How 2.0 column, and many
come from amazingly inventive individuals out there making cool
stuff. (Check out the “Thanks to Our Makers” section for more
info.)

Before starting a project, you can look to the following symbols to
decode what you’re facing.




If you’re just breaking in your screwdriver and have never even
heard the word microcontroller, try out these projects first.
Designed to be doable within five minutes—give or take a few
seconds, depending on your dexterity—and to make use of basic
household items, these tech crafts are the perfect starting ground
for the newbie tinkerer.




These are the big ones—the ambitious projects that you’ll want to
sink some real time and cash into, and that will challenge your
skills as a builder. How much time and cash, you ask? And just
how challenging? The helpful rubric below will give you an idea.
Popular Science has been doing DIY for a very long time—almost
as long as the 140 years the magazine has been in print.
Occasionally this book shares a DIY project from our archives so
you can try your hand at the hilarious retro projects your
grandfather and grandmother built back before, say, television or
smartphones.




Everyone loves a good success story—tales of everyday
individuals who created something so wild that it makes you say . .
. well, “You built WHAT?!” You’ll find several of these stories
throughout the book, and it is our hope that they will inspire you to
take your projects to the next level.
WARNING
If you see this symbol, we mean business. Several of the
projects in this book involve dangerous tools, electrical
current, flammables, potentially harmful chemicals, and
recreational devices that could cause injury if misused. So
remember: With great DIY comes great responsibility. Use
your head, know your tools (and your limitations), always
wear safety gear, and never employ your hacking prowess
to hurt others. (See our Disclaimer for more information
about how Popular Science and the publisher are not liable
for any mishaps.)
001 PUT TOGETHER A SOLDERING KIT
Soldering is playing with fire, or at least with
hot metal. So you need the right tools.

If you’re working on electronics projects, chances are you’ll want
to connect lightweight metal objects like wires, and soldering is the
way to get that done. You heat pieces of metal with a soldering
iron, then join them together using a molten filler, or solder. Once it
cools and hardens, you’re left with a strong, electronically
conductive bond.

SOLDER This is the good stuff—the material you’ll melt to connect
metals. Traditionally, solder was a mix of tin and lead, but these
days look for lead-free types to avoid nasty health risks. Choose
thinner solder for delicate projects, like attaching wires to a circuit
board, and thicker solder for projects involving heftier wires or
bulkier pieces of metal.

SOLDERING IRON This tool has a metal tip and an insulated
handle. When it’s powered on, the tip heats up so it can melt
solder. There are low- and high-wattage versions: Low wattage is
useful for fragile projects, while high wattage is better for projects
involving bigger pieces. There are also different types of tips
available for the soldering iron.

SOLDERING IRON STAND Buy a stand that fits your iron so you’ll
have a place to put it down safely when it’s hot. (Leaving this thing
lying around when it’s turned on is a good way to burn down the
toolshed before you’ve even made anything cool with it!)

WIRE-MODIFYING TOOLS You’ll likely be soldering a lot of wire,
so it’s useful to have wire cutters, wire strippers, and needle-nose
pliers on hand so you can manipulate the wire. Before connecting
wires, you must peel back their insulation to expose the wires, so
wire strippers are definitely a must.

CLIPS AND CLAMPS Soldering requires both hands, so you’ll
need something to hold the materials you’re soldering in place.
Clips, clamps, and even electrical tape can do the job.

LIQUID FLUX Soldering works best when the items being
soldered are squeaky clean, so have liquid flux on hand—it
chases away oxides and other goop that can make soldering
difficult.

HEAT-SHRINK TUBING You can use plastic heat-shrink tubing to
insulate wires before you apply heat and solder them. It’s available
in several diameters for projects with various wire sizes.

TIP CLEANER Your soldering iron’s tip will get a bit nasty as you
work, so keep a wet sponge on hand to periodically wipe down the
tip.

EXHAUST FAN The fumes from soldering are not healthy to
breathe, so you need good ventilation from a fan or an open
window to help clear the air.

SAFETY GOGGLES Bits of hot solder can go flying as you work,
so don’t do it without wearing safety goggles.
002 LEARN SOLDERING BASICS
Now that you have your soldering gear
together, here’s how to get it done.

At its most basic, soldering is simply attaching wires to wires. The
process is a bit different when you’re soldering directly onto a
circuit board, but don’t worry: We’ve got you covered with info for
each.

SOLDERING WIRES

STEP 1 In a well-ventilated space, with your safety goggles on,
plug in your soldering iron to heat it up. Be careful not to touch the
tip, which will heat up fast.

STEP 2 Prepare the materials you want to join with solder. If
you’re connecting two wires, peel back any insulation about ½ inch
(1.25 cm), and twist the wires together. Place your materials on a
surface you don’t mind burning a bit, like scrap wood.

STEP 3 Cut a length from the spool of solder and coil it up at one
end, leaving a short lead. You can hold on to the coiled end as you
apply the solder.
STEP 4 Touch the iron to the point where the wires are twisted
together. Leave it there until the wires are hot enough to melt the
solder (about 10 seconds), then touch the solder to the wire joint
every few seconds until it begins to melt. Allow enough solder to
melt onto the wires to cover them, then pull the solder and
soldering iron away. Don’t touch the solder directly to the soldering
iron during this process—that will melt the solder onto the wires,
but won’t form a firm joint.

STEP 5 When you need to fix a mistake, you can reheat your joint,
melt the solder, and reposition the components. If you want to
break the connection you made for any reason, you can desolder
a joint. For connections like joined wires, you can often simply
heat up the joint and pull the wires apart, or cut each wire below
the joint and resolder as desired.

SOLDERING A CIRCUIT BOARD

STEP 1 Place the component that you wish to solder in the correct
spot on the circuit board and clamp it down, then push the leads
for each component through the holes on the board.

STEP 2 Solder the leads to the bottom of the board. (This is easier
to do with a fine-tipped, low-wattage soldering iron.) Press the
soldering iron to the lead and the metal contact on the board at the
point where you want them to connect. Once they heat up enough
to melt the solder—just a few seconds—melt a small amount of
solder at the connection point (too much can cause a short, too
little won’t make a strong connection).

STEP 3 Pull the solder away, then remove the soldering iron a
second or two later. Once you’ve soldered all the leads onto the
circuit board, trim off excess wire with a wire cutter.

TRY TINNING
If you’re working with components that have to be surface-
mounted on a circuit board—ones that don’t have leads you can
thread through to the back of the board—you’ll need to use a
technique called tinning.

STEP 1 Touch the soldering iron to the point on the board where
you want to attach the component. Melt a small drop of solder on
this point, then remove the soldering iron.

STEP 2 Pick up the component with tweezers, heat up the drop of
solder on the board, and carefully place the component on the
solder.

STEP 3 Hold the component in place for a few seconds until the
solder cools.

STEP 4 If you need to desolder joints on a circuit board, use a
desoldering pump with your soldering iron to melt and remove the
solder.

003 STUDY CIRCUIT COMPONENTS
To build a circuit, first you’ve got to understand
its building blocks.

Maps of how current flows through a circuit are called schematics.
Each component is represented by a labeled symbol, which is
connected to other components by lines to represent the current’s
path.

In this book, we use several circuitry diagrams to show how to
attach projects’ components, so here we’ll introduce you to some
of the main circuit components that show up on these diagrams.
TRANSISTORS A transistor amplifies energy flowing to its
base pin, allowing a larger electrical current to flow between
its collector and emitter pins. The two basic types of
transistors, NPN and PNP, have opposite polarities: Current
flows from collector to emitter in NPN transistors, and flows
from emitter to collector in PNP transistors.




POTENTIOMETERS When you need to vary resistance
within a circuit, use a potentiometer instead of a standard
resistor. These have a controller that allows you to change
the level of resistance: “B” potentiometers have a linear
response curve, while “A” potentiometers have a logarithmic
response curve.




SWITCHES Switches open or close a circuit. Some are
normally open as a default; others are normally closed.
RESISTORS A circuit needs resistance to function. Without
it, you’ll end up with a short circuit, in which the current flows
directly from power to ground without being used, causing
your circuit to overheat and otherwise misbehave. To prevent
that from happening, resistors reduce the flow of electrical
current. The level of resistance is measured in ohms, so
check those numbers to make sure a component’s resistance
matches the level indicated in the circuitry diagram.




CAPACITORS These store electricity, then release it back
into the circuit when there’s a drop in power. Capacitor values
are measured in farads: picofarads (pF), nanofarads (nF),
and microfarads (μF) are the most common units of measure.
Ceramic capacitors aren’t polarized, so they can be inserted
into a circuit in any direction, but electrolytic capacitors are
polarized and need to be inserted in a specific orientation.
BATTERIES These store power for a circuit, and you can use
more than one to increase voltage or current.




WIRE These single strands of metal are often used to
connect the components in a circuit. Wire comes in various
sizes (or gauges), and it’s usually insulated.




DIODES These components are polarized to allow current to
flow through them in only one direction—very useful if you
need to stop the current in your circuit from flowing the wrong
way. The side of a diode that connects to ground is called the
cathode, and the side that connects to power is called the
anode. Light-emitting diodes, or LEDs, light up when current
flows through them.
INTEGRATED CIRCUITS These are tiny circuits (usually
including transistors, diodes, and resistors) prepacked into a
chip. Each leg of the chip will connect to a point in your larger
circuit. These vary widely in their composition, and will come
with a handy data sheet explaining their functions.




TRANSFORMERS These devices range from thumbnail-size
to house-size, and consist of coils of wire wound around a
core, often a magnet. Made to transfer alternating current
from one circuit to another, they can step the power of the
current up or down depending on the ratio of wire windings
between one coil and another.
004 BUILD A CIRCUIT
Now that you know what goes into a circuit, you
can make one.

STEP 1 Assemble all the components that appear on your
schematic, along with any tools you’ll need to make connections,
clamp parts, or trim wires.

STEP 2 To test your circuit before you solder it together, set it up
on a breadboard first. Breadboards are boards covered in small
holes that allow you to lay out and connect components without
soldering them in place.

STEP 3 Once you’re ready to construct the circuit, it’s best to start
by installing the shortest components first. This helps you avoid
having to move taller components out of the way, and allows you
to flip the board over to hold the component you’re working on in
place. As you install components, orient their labels in the same
direction so they’re all legible at once.

STEP 4 Many components have lead wires that you can insert into
a circuit board. Bend these leads before you insert the component
so that you don’t stress the part or the board.

STEP 5 You’ll need to hold your parts in place while you solder the
circuit together. You can do this by clinching lead wires (bending
them slightly on the other side of the board to hold them in place),
using tape, or bracing the parts against your work surface.

STEP 6 As you solder, check that each component is aligned
correctly after you solder the first pin or lead—it’s easier to make
adjustments at this point, before you’ve finished soldering the part
in place.
STEP 7 When everything’s soldered in place, trim all your circuit’s
lead wires and test it out.




005 CHOOSE A MICROCONTROLLER
Most geeks know a thing or two about
microcontrollers. So get these basics under
your belt.

A microcontroller is essentally a tiny computer, complete with a
central processing unit (CPU), memory, and input and output. It’s
really useful for controlling switches, LEDs, and other simple
electronic devices. Here are a few features you’ll want to consider
when choosing one for a project.

PROGRAMMABILITY Ideally, you want a microcontroller that you
can erase and reprogram a number of times. Some can only be
programmed once—these are fine if you’re building something
more permanent—and some allow you to add external memory for
complex projects.
MEMORY Microcontrollers come with a set amount of memory,
which is sometimes upgradable, but only to a certain extent. Make
sure that the microcontroller you choose has sufficient memory to
handle your project.

COMPLEXITY For a more complex project, you’ll need to seek out
a model with lots of input and output pins and more memory than
the lower-end microcontrollers.

PHYSICAL PACKAGING A microcontroller’s construction can
influence how easy it is to use. For instance, less space between
pins can make the device harder to work with. Check out the setup
before you put down your cash.

PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE Different microcontrollers use
different programming languages. Choose one that uses a
language you know or are willing to learn.

SOFTWARE Some microcontrollers have better, easier-to-use
software tools than others. If you’re a beginner, be wary of using a
microcontroller with poorly designed software tools. Ask around
among your tech-savvy friends to get a sense of what’s right for
you.
006 PROGRAM AN ARDUINO
An Arduino is a popular open-source single-
board microcontroller. Learn how to program
one and let the possibilities take shape.

STEP 1 Arduino microcontrollers come in a variety of types. The
most common is the Arduino UNO, but there are specialized
variations. Before you begin building, do a little research to figure
out which version will be the most appropriate for your project.

STEP 2 To begin, you’ll need to install the Arduino Programmer,
aka the integrated development environment (IDE).

STEP 3 Connect your Arduino to the USB port of your computer.
This may require a specific USB cable. Every Arduino has a
different virtual serial-port address, so you’ll need to reconfigure
the port if you’re using different Arduinos.

STEP 4 Set the board type and the serial port in the Arduino
Programmer.
STEP 5 Test the microcontroller by using one of the preloaded
programs, called sketches, in the Arduino Programmer. Open one
of the example sketches, and press the upload button to load it.
The Arduino should begin responding to the program: If you’ve set
it to blink an LED light, for example, the light should start blinking.

STEP 6 To upload new code to the Arduino, either you’ll need to
have access to code you can paste into the programmer, or you’ll
have to write it yourself, using the Arduino programming language
to create your own sketch. An Arduino sketch usually has five
parts: a header describing the sketch and its author; a section
defining variables; a setup routine that sets the initial conditions of
variables and runs preliminary code; a loop routine, which is where
you add the main code that will execute repeatedly until you stop
running the sketch; and a section where you can list other
functions that activate during the setup and loop routines. All
sketches must include the setup and loop routines.

STEP 7 Once you’ve uploaded the new sketch to your Arduino,
disconnect it from your computer and integrate it into your project
as directed.

007 KNOW BASIC WOODWORKING TOOLS
Set up a proper shop with some essential
carpentry gear.

MEASURING TOOLS Accurately measuring lengths and angles is
essential. A simple tape measure and a combination square
(which allows you to measure and check angles) help you mark
your cuts accurately.

HAND SAW This is the most basic, inexpensive saw that most of
us have stashed somewhere in our garages. You should have one
on hand and sharpened for making cuts that don’t need to be
incredibly precise.

TABLE SAW Now you’re cutting with power. This electric saw
features a circular saw blade set into a surface, and to make a
nice, straight cut in an item, you push it across the blade as it
spins. If it sounds dangerous, that’s because it is. Be very careful
when operating one of these saws.

JIGSAW Use this power tool when you need to make a curved cut
in wood or metal. The jigsaw can be difficult to control, and as a
result is dangerous—use it only when you require irregular
contours or artistic touches.

ROTARY TOOL This simple yet versatile device allows you to cut,
drill, sand, and carve into all sorts of materials. It comes with a
variety of bits.

BLOCK PLANE This hand tool is useful when you want to soften
edges and plane flat surfaces.

DRILL This device is your old faithful—your basic tool for making
holes in wood. The size of the hole depends on the bit that you
choose.

ROUTER A more advanced cutting alternative, a router is a power
tool that accepts a variety of bits and creates hollows in surfaces.
It’s useful for making different wood moldings and joints.

SANDING BLOCK To smooth wood by hand, outfit a sanding
block with sandpaper.

RANDOM-ORBIT SANDER This power sander is useful for faster
sanding and large projects.

CLAMPS You’ll want to have a variety of clamps on hand to hold
your project steady as you glue it together.
WORKBENCH You need a solid surface to work on as you
assemble your project.

VISE Some workbenches have a built-in vise, and those designed
for woodworking won’t damage the wood.

SAFETY GEAR Especially when using power tools, goggles are
essential to protect your eyes from flying wood chips, and earplugs
or noise-blocking headphones protect your hearing by muffling the
noise. A face mask will also keep fine sawdust out of your lungs.

008 MAKE A STRAIGHT CUT IN WOOD
Because sawing straight lines can be trickier
than you might think.

You can do most woodworking projects without elaborate table
saws and expensive machinery (though they’re handy if you have
them). But you’ll probably want to have these essentials on hand.

STEP 1 Mark your cut with a ruler and pencil, on the sides as well
as the top of the wood. When measuring, take the width of your
saw blade (called kerf) into account, and use an arrow to show
which side of the line you’ll cut on.

STEP 2 Place your saw on a corner at your mark, and draw it
backward with light pressure to create a notch. Repeat this to
deepen the notch, then adjust the saw gradually to make a shallow
cut along the line on the top surface of the wood. Be careful that
you don’t press down too hard on the saw; if you do, it could catch.

STEP 3 Using the first groove and your penciled guides, turn the
wood and repeat the second step on the other sides. The wood
will have shallow cuts on the top and sides.
STEP 4 Turn the wood top up again, and finish sawing through the
piece. To avoid splintering, tilt the saw back and support the wood
you’re cutting as you finish the cut. The grooves on the sides will
help keep the saw straight.

009 MASTER WOODWORKING JOINTS
If “butt joint” sounds like a joke to you, grow up
and learn these woodworking staples.

TO MAKE A MITERED BUTT JOINT

STEP 1 To join two pieces of wood at a 90-degree angle, you’ll
first need to mark each piece of wood with a line at a 45-degree
angle, drawn from front to back at the corner of each piece. Mark
this 45-degree angle on opposite sides of each piece, and join the
bottom corners of those lines together with a straight line on the
third side. This will mark out the triangular wedge of wood you’ll be
removing from each piece.

STEP 2 Start your cut at one of the 45-degree lines, cutting a
shallow groove. Finish your cut carefully, checking that your cut
lines up with both the end corner of the wood and the straight line
that you drew. Repeat on the second piece of wood.

STEP 3 Once you’ve cut each end into a 45-degree angle, line the
pieces up with the newly cut surfaces touching. Check to make
sure this forms a 90-degree angle, then glue the ends together
with wood glue to form a mitered butt joint. Clamp the joint while it
dries.

TO MAKE A MORTISE AND TENON JOINT

STEP 1 To create this type of joint, you’ll need to cut one piece of
wood so that a section protrudes (the tenon) and another piece so
that it has a hole (the mortise). First, measure and mark the tenon,
making it wide and long enough to create a strong joint.

STEP 2 Use a saw to cut out the tenon. You’ll need to cut away a
rectangular chunk of wood on each side of a central piece of wood
that will form the tenon.

STEP 3 Use the tenon to measure out the mortise on the other
piece of wood. Mark a space for the mortise on both sides of the
wood.

STEP 4 Choose a drill bit that just fits inside the marks, and drill a
hole halfway through the wood. Flip it over, then drill the rest of the
way through the wood, using the marks you made in the third step
as a guide.

STEP 5 Use a hammer and chisel or a jigsaw to cut the mortise
square.

STEP 6 Fit the tenon into the mortise. Depending on your project,
you can use a dowel, glue, or a wedge to keep the joint locked
together.

010 DRILL A HOLE
Think this is easy? It usually is—especially if
you use the right tools and techniques.

STEP 1 Choose a drill bit that’s the right size and length for the
hole you need to drill.

STEP 2 Mark the spot where you want your hole, then use a
center punch to create a dent at the mark. This will help keep the
drill bit in place as you work.

STEP 3 Clamp the material you’ll be drilling in place.
STEP 4 When you turn on your drill, check to make sure that the
drill bit is spinning clockwise.

STEP 5 Drill into the material. As you go, the drill should feel like
it’s moving smoothly without requiring too much pressure. If that’s
not happening, stop and check for materials that could be clogging
the bit.

STEP 6 When you’re drilling, you can put the drill in reverse
(spinning counterclockwise) to back out of each hole you make. If
the back of a hole isn’t smooth, use a deburring tool to remove
burrs and splinters.

011 SUIT UP WITH METALWORKING TOOLS
Ready for some metal? You will be—once you
have these basics together.

A handful of this book’s projects require you to do some
metalworking—either shaping it, or fusing one metal piece with
another. Now, we wouldn’t want you to do that without the right
gear, would we?

HOT-CUTTING TOOLS Hot metal is easier to cut than cold, which
is why torches and hot-cutting chisels come in handy.

COLD-CUTTING TOOLS Cold chisels are often used to create
grooves in metal, and hacksaws are useful for getting through
thick, cold metal.

PLIERS These tools help you handle metal that’s hot or coated in
toxic materials.

VISES AND CLAMPS These secure the metal you’re working on,
and can also be used to hold multiple pieces of metal together.
FILE A file grates away excess metal, allowing you to reshape a
project as needed.

SANDPAPER This is the go-to tool you’ll need for smoothing
rough patches.

SAFETY GLASSES When you’re working with metal, wear
welding goggles or a welding hood at all times.

EAR PROTECTION When using tools that make lots of noise,
cover your ears to avoid damaging your hearing.

WORK BOOTS Steel-toed or other thick, hard-soled shoes are
essential protective gear when you’re working with sharp or hot
metal.

HEAVY GLOVES Last, but not least, take this important safety
precaution: Protect your hands with thick, insulated gloves. Some
metal pros wear leather ones, as leather isn’t especially flammable
—and it looks cool, too.

012 CUT METAL PIPES AND SHEETS
If you’re working on plumbing or with metal
sheet, you’ll probably need to make a cut or
two. Here’s how.

TO CUT A METAL PIPE

STEP 1 Wearing the appropriate eye protection, clamp the pipe in
place on your work table, and mark a line on the pipe where you
want to cut.

STEP 2 Place a hacksaw on the marked line, checking to make
sure that the blade is perfectly aligned with the mark. Begin
cutting, using your non-dominant hand to put gentle pressure on
the top of the saw as you move it back and forth across the pipe.
Check the alignment periodically as you work to ensure a clean
cut.

STEP 3 Carefully remove the cut pipe from the clamp or vise, and
smooth the cut edge with a file as needed to avoid sharp edges.

TO CUT SHEET METAL

STEP 1 Place the sheet on your work table, with the section you
want to cut protruding over the edge. Hold it in place with clamps,
and mark the line where you’ll cut.

STEP 2 Use a jigsaw or other cutting tool to cut along the line you
marked (the appropriate tool will vary depending on the type and
thickness of the metal you’re cutting). Hold the sheet with one
hand while gently pushing the cutting tool along the line. Slow
down if the sheet starts to vibrate excessively.

STEP 3 When you’re finished cutting, use a file to smooth the cut
edge of the metal sheet, and then unclamp the sheet from your
work table.




013 LEARN TO WELD
It goes without saying that welding is cool. It’s
also really useful.

Welding allows you to join metals by heating them, then melting or
compressing them together.There are several types—such as arc,
gas, and resistance. Here’s some basic information on arc
welding, the most common method.
STEP 1 Safety first. Welding fumes can be really unhealthy, so set
up in a well-ventilated area. Arc welding generates UV rays that
can easily burn your skin, and molten metal can fly up and hit you,
so cover exposed skin and keep a welding hood on the entire time
you’re working. Wear insulated welding gloves to avoid burns and
electric shock, and always use work boots with insulated soles.
Finally, use a work table made of nonflammable material.

STEP 2 Before you begin welding, prepare the pieces of metal you
want to join. It’s useful to bevel the edges you’ll be joining, to allow
the weld arc to penetrate and create a strong bond. Clean the
metal surfaces of all paint, rust, and other contaminants that could
interfere with the current created by the welding machine. Once
the pieces are prepped, secure them together with clamps.

STEP 3 Attach a ground clamp to the larger piece of metal you’ll
be welding. The clamp will complete the circuit and allow electricity
to pass through the metal once you begin welding.

STEP 4 Choose the right electrode and amperage settings for
your welding machine—this will vary depending on your project.
Attach the electrode to its holder, called a stinger.

STEP 5 Turn on the welder, and hold the stinger by its insulated
handle using your dominant hand. You should be wearing all your
protective gear at this point.

STEP 6 To begin welding, you need to strike an arc. Choose
where you’d like to begin the weld, and tap that point with the end
of your electrode. Immediately pull the electrode back slightly: This
should create an electric arc between the metal and your
electrode. The amount of space you’ll need between the metal and
the electrode varies depending on your project, and it may take
practice to hold a continuous arc.

STEP 7 Move the arc along the path of your weld. This will create
a weld bead, formed by the metal from the melting electrode and
the base metal. The weld bead forms the bond that will hold your
pieces of metal together. Move the electrode in a zig-zag motion to
shape the weld bead to the desired width.

STEP 8 Once your weld is done, chip off any slag and use a wire
brush to clean up the bond. To avoid rust, paint the metal.
014 THE ULTIMATE ALL-IN-ONE BEER-
BREWING MACHINE
Behold this deluxe homemade microbrewery:
an elaborate device that boils, ferments, chills,
and pours home-crafted ale.

What if there were a machine—a beautiful, shiny machine—and all
it did, with almost no work from you, was make you beer? Such
was the dream that drove former PopSci photographer John
Carnett to build what he calls “the Device”: a stainless-steel, two-
cart brewing system that starts by boiling extract (concentrated
wort, or pre-fermented beer) and ends with a chilled pint.

In most home-brewing setups, each step in the process requires
moving the beer to a new container by hand, which increases the
chance of contamination and requires lifting. Carnett’s machine
keeps everything in the carts’ closed system—he only has to swap
a few CO2-pressurized hoses to move the liquid along.

The delicious brew’s journey begins in the boil keg, where
concentrated wort extract is heated by a propane burner for 90
minutes. The beer then travels through a heat exchanger—which
cools the mix to about 55°F (13°C)—on its way to the fermenting
keg. Here, a network of Freon-chilled copper tubes pumps cool
water around the keg when the temperature gets too high. After
two weeks, the Device pumps the beer into a settling keg, where a
CO2 tank adds carbonation. When you pull the tap, the beer
travels through the cold plate, so it’s chilled on the way to your
glass. That’s right: The Device is always ready with a cold pour
and consumes no power when it’s not actively serving or
fermenting.




  BUILDING A BETTER BREW
  The next step? Adding a third cart to make wort from raw
  grain instead of extract. But, says Carnett, there’s a lot of
  “testing” of the new design to be done first.
015 DRINK BOOZE FROM A MELON
Turn basic produce into a hilarious drink
dispenser.

MATERIALS
Medium seedless watermelon
Large spoon
Drill
Knife
Ball valve faucet with a handle
Rubber O-ring that fits the faucet
PVC-to-faucet adapter
Alcohol of your choosing

STEP 1 Using a knife, cut off just enough of the bottom of your
melon so that it sits flat.

STEP 2 Pick the side of the melon that you want to be the front,
then cut a hole in the top, toward the rear. Save the piece you’ve
cut out, as you’ll use it later.

STEP 3 Scoop out the fruit with a large spoon.

STEP 4 Drill a hole in the melon’s front, near the bottom. Using a
knife, widen it so it’s big enough for the faucet to fit inside.

STEP 5 Gently screw the faucet into the hole. (It helps to stick
your free hand inside the melon and guide the faucet into place
from the inside.)

STEP 6 Slide the O-ring onto the back of the faucet inside the
melon, then install the adapter. Test for leaks.

STEP 7 Load it up with the elixir of your choosing, put the cut-out
top back in place, and get your pour on.
016 BREAK INTO YOUR BEER
STEP 1 Use a metal file to wear down a carabiner’s hook end so
that it fits under a bottle cap’s lip. (Be careful not to file it down too
much or the carabiner won’t close properly.)

STEP 2 Open the carabiner and place the unmodified end against
the beer cap, then tuck the hook end under the cap’s lip and use it
as a lever to pry open your brew.

STEP 3 Carry your carabiner as a keychain so that you’re always
ready when beer suddenly, magically happens to you.
017 INSTALL A SHOWER BEER CADDY
STEP 1 Buy a cup holder at an automotive parts store. (Some
have a hook on the back, which you don’t need—remove it by
gently breaking it off along the seam or cutting it off with a rotary
tool.)

STEP 2 Drill a hole into the back of the cup holder that’s just wide
enough to accommodate the tip of a suction cup.
STEP 3 Insert the suction cup’s tip into the hole, press the suction
cup to the shower wall, and load your beer of choice into the
caddy.




018 CHILL YOUR BEER REALLY, REALLY FAST
STEP 1 Drill a hole into the side of a plastic container. The hole
should be just wide enough that you can poke the straw of a
container of compressed air through it.

STEP 2 Fill the plastic container with as many beers as you can fit.
Cover with the lid.

STEP 3 Tape it shut. (Trust us. Otherwise the injected blast of cool
air could blow the lid right off.)

STEP 4 Wearing thick, insulated gloves, turn the can of
compressed air upside down and insert the can’s straw into the
hole, being careful not to touch the cans with it.
STEP 5 Squeeze for up to 1 minute.

STEP 6 Open the container and tap on each can’s top for a few
seconds to relieve the pressure inside. Then open one up and
take a big swig—you’ve earned it.




019 DISGUISE YOUR BREW
STEP 1 Using a can opener, remove the top and bottom of an
innocent-looking soda can.

STEP 2 Using scissors, cut off the soda can’s bottom lip.
STEP 3 Cut along the soda can’s seam.

STEP 4 Using a metal file, sand down the can’s edges to avoid
cuts and scrapes. Get it as smooth as possible.

STEP 5 Wrap the soda can around your beer and enjoy your
incognito beverage.




020 REUSE THOSE RED PARTY CUPS
Keep the infamous cup in play long after the
keg's run dry. (Just rinse out that stale-beer
smell first.)
 DIY CAMERA LENS HOOD
 Fend off glare with an impromptu lens hood. Cut the bottom
 out of your party cup, and then poke two holes on either side
 near the bottom. Thread a rubber band through each hole and
 knot them. Place the cup over your lens, tie the rubber bands
 around your camera near the viewfinder, and keep rain out of
 your shots.

 MEASURE (MORE) BOOZE
 Engineers say that the ridges on party cups are for structural
 integrity, but people have long used them as measurement
 lines: the first indentation from the bottom marks 1 ounce (30
 mL), the second 5 ounces (147 mL), and the third a full 12
 ounces (355 mL).

 POOR MAN’S CHANDELIER
 Poke holes in the bottoms of about 60 cups. Then glue the
 cups together along their sides with their open ends facing
 outward, forming a ball. Insert a bulb from a string of
 Christmas lights into each hole as you go to make a huge,
 sparkling plastic orb.

 MAKESHIFT BEER INSULATOR
 Cut Styrofoam to fit the bottom of your cup and place it inside,
 then spray a can with nonstick cooking spray. Put the can
 inside the cup and fill around it with expanding foam. Let the
 foam dry and trim the excess. Call it a koozie.




021 THE DRINK-SLINGING DROID
This robot tends bar like a pro. And even better,
it never needs a tip.

A veteran of the TV show BattleBots, Jamie Price has built plenty
of destructive machines. But recently he designed a robot with a
more mellow calling: offering cold beer and cocktails. The result—
a masterpiece of plywood, plastic, aluminum, and electric motors
called Bar2D2—serves up everything but the sage advice.

The salesman modeled his machine on the iconic Star Wars droid
R2-D2, and spent seven months and $2,000 building it. He used a
plastic dome from a bird feeder as the head and built the robot’s
plywood skeleton to match. To make Bar2D2 mobile, Price
stripped out the seat, the control system, and a pair of wheels from
an electric wheelchair, added a new 12-volt battery, and wired a
receiver to the motor so he could control it with an R/C helicopter-
type remote.

Price fills each of the robot’s six bottles with either liquor or a
mixer, and then plugs these ingredients into a software program.
The program computes a list of possible drinks, Price picks one,
and the software sends pouring instructions to the robot via
Bluetooth. A custom circuit board receives the signals and moves
actuators that open specific valves just long enough for the robot’s
air-pressure system to force the right amount of each liquid into a
waiting glass.

Bar2D2 has already proven to be a hit among robotics and cocktail
fans alike, but Price isn’t finished yet. Next he’s adding a
breathalyzer and an LED-backed projector that displays blood-
alcohol content. Give us your keys, Obi-Wan.
BEER ME, BAR2D2
One difficulty was finding a way to move bottles up from the
enclosed beer rack to the serving station above. When Price
hits a button on his remote, the rod of a motorized caulk gun
extends and pushes the beer up from the lower level. He calls
it his beer elevator.
022 SERVE SHOTS IN JELL-O CUPS
STEP 1 Mix up your Jell-O and pour it into a muffin tin’s
compartments, filling each about half full.

STEP 2 Place small pebbles into paper cups to weight them. Put a
cup in each tin compartment and cover each with tape.

STEP 3 Wait for the Jell-O to solidify around the paper cups,
molding into a cup shape. Remove the cups and pebbles.

STEP 4 Fill up the Jell-O cups with booze. Be popular at a party
near you.
023 MAKE DRINKS GLOW IN THE DARK
The magic glowing ingredients? Simple
riboflavin and quinine, plus a trippy black light.

FOR BLUE DRINKS:

STEP 1 Mix any drink you want.

STEP 2 Add tonic water.

STEP 3 Drink it near a black light.

FOR YELLOW DRINKS:
STEP 1 Crush up a B2 vitamin and put a pinch of the powder in
the bottom of your glass.

STEP 2 Pour in a flavored drink, as the vitamin has a faint bitter
taste.

STEP 3 Drink it near a black light.




024 FREEZE LEGO ICE CUBES
Make a mold of LEGO bricks and enjoy the
world’s geekiest ice.

MATERIALS
A LEGO base plate and bricks
Petroleum jelly
Mold compound
Craft knife
Food coloring, if desired

STEP 1 Wash and dry the base plate and blocks.

STEP 2 Build a LEGO tray on the base plate: Make four sides
three blocks in height, then place single bricks inside the border,
spacing them evenly with one or two row of bumps between each.

STEP 3 Coat the tray in petroleum jelly, then slowly fill the tray
with the mold compound and set aside for at least 12 hours. Bang
on the table to prevent bubbles.

STEP 4 Peel the mold out of the LEGO tray and trim any random
bits off with the craft knife.

STEP 5 Wash the mold and turn it over. Fill the depressions with
water (add food coloring, if you roll that way), slide it in the freezer,
and await your cubes.




025 COOK A HOT DOG WITH ELECTRICAL
CURRENT
An LED display lights up the room and nukes
your hot dog, too.

MATERIALS
Power cord
Wire strippers
Two alligator clips
Soldering iron and solder
Hot dog
Nonconductive plate
Two metal forks
Assorted LEDs

STEP 1 Using wire strippers, cut off the end of the power cord and
peel back the outer insulation. Snip back the green ground cord
and strip the ends of the remaining two wires.

STEP 2 Solder one small alligator clip to each of the stripped wires
(except for the ground).

STEP 3 Put the hot dog on a nonconductive plate (ceramic works
nicely). Secure each alligator clip to a fork, and stick the forks into
the hot dog.

STEP 4 Stick some LEDs into the hot dog.

STEP 5 Very carefully plug the cord into the wall. Don’t touch the
hot dog or any of the rest of the contraption while the cord is
plugged in.

STEP 6 The hot dog will cook in a minute or two. Not that you’re
going to eat it, right?




     WARNING
     Use this activity to impress your friends with your electrical
     chops, not your culinary skills. Eating the resulting hot dog
     is a seriously bad idea. Also, keep water very far away
     from this science experiment!
026 MOD YOUR TOASTER FOR FAR-FROM-
AVERAGE TOAST
Because bread tastes a lot better with funny
faces on it.

MATERIALS
Toaster
Paper
Pencil
Craft knife
Glue stick
Aluminum flashing
Utility knife
Metal file
Bread that needs toasting

STEP 1 Unplug your toaster and remove the insert—that’s the part
that holds bread slices in place. Measure the space between the
insert’s two prongs.

STEP 2 Cut two pieces of paper to fit between these two prongs.
Draw or print a shape that you want to see on your breakfast onto
the paper. Include a tab on either side of each shape that you can
wrap around the prongs to hold your design in place inside the
toaster.

STEP 3 Use a craft knife to cut out the negative spaces around
and in your design, creating a stencil.

STEP 4 Glue the paper pieces to aluminum flashing. Use a utility
knife to cut the shapes and their tabs out of the flashing, then
smooth the edges with a metal file.

STEP 5 Gently and thoroughly wash off the glue and remove all
the paper. With the toaster unplugged, use the shapes’ tabs to
hook them to the toaster insert.

STEP 6 Plug the toaster in, replace the insert, put in some bread,
and make some really fun toast.




    WARNING
    Toasters may seem harmless enough, but once they’re
    plugged in they’re juiced with powerful voltage. No prongs,
    aluminum flashing, or paper bits should come into contact
    with the toaster’s electric heaters.




027 WIELD A POTATO LAUNCHER
Potatoes—they’re not just for the dinner table.
Build this cannon and see spuds fly.

MATERIALS
2 feet (60 cm) of 16-gauge insulated wire
Wire strippers
BBQ igniter
Various PVC parts (see diagram below)
Soldering iron and solder
PVC primer
PVC pipe cement
Drill
Two 8-by-2½-inch (20-by-6.35-cm) machine screws
Leather gloves
Electrical tape
Hair spray
Potatoes

STEP 1 Cut the insulated wire in half and strip back a bit of the
ends of each piece.

STEP 2 Find the fine wire near the igniter button’s lip. Twist this
wire’s end with one stripped insulated wire; solder them together.
Secure with electrical tape.

STEP 3 Locate the igniter’s main wire near the base. Cut it,
leaving about 2 inches (5 cm) at the plug end. Strip, twist, and
solder the end with the other insulated wire.

STEP 4 Prime the adapter, coupler, combustion chamber, and
bushing. (Don’t get primer on the threads.)
STEP 5 Immediately apply pipe cement to the parts of the adapter,
coupler, combustion chamber, and bushing that will fit together.
Cement the coupler and bushing to the combustion chamber, and
the adapter to the coupler.

STEP 6 Right the assembled pieces and twist them while
pressing, then check that the combustion chamber fits 1½ inches
(3.75 cm) into the coupler and equally far into the bushing.

STEP 7 Wait 10 minutes for the cement to dry, then drill two holes
in the combustion chamber at a 90-degree angle to one another,
closer to the coupler than the bushing. Drive in two machine
screws, leaving ¼ inch (6.35 mm) between them inside the pipe.

STEP 8 Prime one end of the 36-inch (91-cm) pipe—this is your
barrel—and the smaller, exposed end of the bushing. Apply pipe
cement and twist to seal.

STEP 9 Wrap the ends of each of the insulated wires around the
screws in the combustion chamber. Then tighten the screws and
insulate with electrical tape.

STEP 10 Wearing leather gloves, lash the ignitor button to the
combustion chamber’s side using electrical tape.

STEP 11 Let the contraption dry for 48 hours before using it.
(Otherwise, it may blow up—trust us on this stuff.) Test the igniter
button to make sure there’s a spark. If there is, twist on the
threaded plug at the end.

STEP 12 Place the launcher on the ground and securely lodge a
potato into the end of the barrel, about 2 inches (5 cm) inside.
Rotate the potato to mold it into a cylindrical shape that fits tightly
in the barrel.

STEP 13 Remove the end cap and spray a two-second blast of
hair spray into the chamber. Close it again.
STEP 14 Pick up the launcher, point it in a safe direction, and
press the BBQ igniter. Watch that tater go!




  THE ARTILLERY-GRADE PUMPKIN GUN
  Gary Arold and John Gill’s favorite pastime is sending
  pumpkins flying. They welded two huge propane tanks onto a
  platform, connected by a T-shaped steel pipe that extends
  into a barrel, with an external air compressor that connects
  the first tank with a rubber hose. Yanking on the lever opens a
  butterfly valve and pummels the payload with pressurized air,
  shooting the pumpkin at up to 600 miles per hour (965 km/h).
     WARNING
     You’re building a pretty powerful spud gun here, buddy. Be
     careful of flammable fuels and always, always watch where
     you point this thing.




028 IMPROVISE A PLANETARIUM




Gaze at a starfield featuring twinkling
constellations of your own devising.

MATERIALS
LilyPad Arduino
Breakout board
USB cable
Velcro
Sewing needle and thread
Two same-size pieces of black fabric
Conductive thread
Wire strippers
Single-stranded wire
Six LEDs
Soldering iron and solder
Scissors
Fiber optic filament
Electrical tape
3.7-volt polymer lithium ion battery and a mini USB charger for them
Small clear beads
Hot-glue gun

STEP 1 Connect your LilyPad Arduino to your computer using a
breakout board and a USB cable. Then load it up with the code at
popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks.

STEP 2 Sew Velcro around the edges of the fabric pieces, and
sew the LilyPad Arduino near the edge of one fabric piece using
conductive thread.

STEP 3 Strip the wire and make small loops. Solder the loops to
the six LEDs’ connectors, making “buttons.”

STEP 4 Create a pattern and print it out in a size to fill your ceiling.
Tape it onto the other piece of fabric—not the one you attached
the LilyPad Arduino to.

STEP 5 Look at your pattern and decide where you’ll need the
most fiber-optic bundles. Space the LEDs so the filaments can
extend from them to fill the pattern.

STEP 6 Sew the buttons onto the fabric piece that you sewed the
LilyPad Arduino to, connecting each LED to one of the LilyPad
Arduinoterminals with conductive thread. Use terminals 3, 5, 6, 9,
10, and 11.

STEP 7 Cut fiber-optic filaments into varying lengths and gather
them into six bundles of 10 to 20 strands. Tape the ends of the
filaments in each bundle together.

STEP 8 Attach the battery to the LilyPad Arduino; each LED will
light up. Then use electrical tape to secure the filament bundles
over the LEDs and to the fabric.

STEP 9 Thread the filaments through the second piece of fabric,
following the pattern. It helps to use a small, sharp tool to poke
holes for the filaments. When finished, remove the pattern.

STEP 10 Slide a clear bead onto each filament and hot-glue it on
the underside of the fabric. Trim the filament.

STEP 11 Use the Velcro to connect the fabric pieces together with
the filaments in between them. Hang it up with small nails or
hooks, lean back, and admire your new starry, starry night.
029 PUT ON A LIQUID LIGHT SHOW
Project extreme grooviness with this simple
psychedelic setup.

MATERIALS
Cardboard sheet
Scissors
Overhead projector with bottom lighting
Two thin, round glass nesting bowls
White wall or sheet
Water
Water-based dye
Mineral oil
Oil-based dye
Eyedropper
STEP 1 Measure and cut the cardboard sheet so that it fits over
the projector base. Cut a hole in its center that’s slightly smaller
than the small glass bowl.

STEP 2 Place the cardboard on the projector surface. (It will mask
the bowls’ edges and keep your hands from blocking the display.)

STEP 3 Position the projector so that the light shining through the
cutout completely fills your target screen and the edges aren’t
visible.

STEP 4 Add just enough water-based dye, such as food coloring,
to a glass of water to produce a light tint.

STEP 5 Place the larger glass bowl on the projector surface face
up, so it’s centered over the cutout. Pour the colored water in it so
that its bottom is covered.

STEP 6 Combine mineral oil with oil-based dye in a separate
container, and fill an eyedropper with it.

STEP 7 Drop small amounts of colored oil into the water with the
eyedropper.

STEP 8 Place the small glass bowl inside the large bowl. The
water and oil mixture should just fill the space between the two
bowls.

STEP 9 To start the light show, turn on the projector (and some
psychedelic tunes) and move the bowls gently. Rotate them to
swirl the liquids, or lift and lower them to move the image in and
out of focus.
030 JAM OUT TO A SOUND-REACTIVE LIGHT
BOX




Watch beats blink in time with a slick-looking
LED display.

MATERIALS
Sheet of 3-mm Plexiglas
Ruler
Table saw
Drill with a glass bit
Audio cable
18-volt adapter
Fine sandpaper
Hot-glue gun
Six white 5-mm LEDs
TIP31 transistor
Electrical wire
Soldering iron and solder

STEP 1 To make the box, measure the Plexiglas into four 6-by-2-
inch (15-by-4.7-cm) pieces and two 2-by-2-inch (5-by-5-cm)
pieces. Cut them with a table saw outfitted with a plastic-cutting
blade.

STEP 2 Drill two holes near a corner in one of the long pieces: one
for the audio cable that will go to a stereo and one that’s large
enough to fit the plug on the adapter cord. Go lightly or the
Plexiglas may break.

STEP 3 Using a circular motion, sand both sides of the pieces and
the surfaces of the LED bulbs to get a cloudy, frosted look.

STEP 4 Hot-glue three of the rectangular panels together along
their long edges, then glue the square pieces to the ends. Sand
the joints after the glue dries.

STEP 5 Pull the audio cable through one of the box’s holes and
peel back the plastic to expose its wires on the inside of the box.

STEP 6 Wire the electronics according to the circuitry diagram. If
you want more LEDs, buy an adapter that provides each LED with
3 volts.

STEP 7 Put the circuit in the box. Pull the adapter plug through the
hole in the box, then glue it in place.
STEP 8 Glue the last Plexiglas piece onto the box. Plug the audio
cable into your stereo’s speaker output and plug the adapter into a
power outlet.

STEP 9 Pick a song, and see it in lights.




031 WAVE AN LED LIGHTER AT A CONCERT
Power ballads sound even more epic with this
lighter mod.
MATERIALS
Dead lighter with absolutely no fluid inside
Pliers
Hacksaw
3-volt LED
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical wire
Two AAA batteries
Aluminum-foil duct tape
Superglue

STEP 1 Check to make sure your lighter is empty. If not, hold
down the lever until the lighter fluid evaporates.

STEP 2 Using the pliers, pry off the metal shield at the top of the
dead lighter. Carefully remove the striker wheel, fuel lever, spring,
and fuel valve inside; set aside.

STEP 3 Cut ¼ inch (6.35 mm) off the bottom of the lighter with the
hacksaw. Pry out the plastic divider.

STEP 4 In the middle of the metal shield’s underside, create a
dent with your pliers—this will be a contact point for the switch.

STEP 5 Solder the LED’s negative lead to the shield near the dent
and the positive lead to a piece of electrical wire 1 inch (2.5 cm) in
length.

STEP 6 Solder a piece of wire 1 inch (2.5 cm) in length to the
underside of the metal part of the fuel lever.

STEP 7 Put the spring and fuel lever inside the lighter. Reinsert
the metal shield and thread the long wire attached to the LED
through the flint tube.

STEP 8 Line the batteries up with opposite polarities next to each
other, then tape a piece of stripped wire across them using
aluminum-foil duct tape.

STEP 9 Follow the circuitry diagram, connecting the LED and fuel
lever’s wires to the batteries with aluminum-foil duct tape.

STEP 10 Slide the batteries inside and glue the bottom back on.
It’s slow-jam time.




032 PARTY WITH AN LED GLOW STICK
STEP 1 Using tape, attach a 3-volt LED’s longer lead to a coin
battery’s positive side and its shorter lead to the negative side.

STEP 2 Disassemble the ballpoint pen. Discard everything but the
pen tube.

STEP 3 Place the LED into the tube and tape the battery in place.
Dance.
 HOW GEEKS GET DOWN
 Everyone who actually worked on the floor and isn’t a
 professional model, raise your hand.




033 AN LED-LIT DISCO DANCE FLOOR
When dance fever hit MIT, students built a
computer-controlled, LED-lit disco floor.

A group of undergrads at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology took on a challenge more daunting than classwork:
disco. Before a dorm party, Mike Anderson, Grant Elliott, Schuyler
Senft-Grupp, and Scott Torborg worked night and day for a week
to build a computer-controlled, pixelated dance floor out of 1-by-4-
foot (30-by-120-cm) boards, LEDs, tinfoil, paper towels, and old
computer parts. The result would make Travolta weep with joy.

Each of the 512 pixels contains three LEDs pointed down at a
square of paper towel that sits in a larger piece of foil. The foil
reflects the light up through the plastic floor, while the paper towel
mutes its glow. (LEDs stay cool, so the towels won’t ignite.) A
computer controls each pixel individually, and the open-source
software generates 25 disco-tastic patterns, enabling DJs to match
the light show to the music they’re playing—and code-savvy disco
fans to add new light patterns. What’s more, by varying the
intensity of each bulb, the students can blend light from the red,
green, and blue LEDs housed in each pixel to produce any color.
And should the party get extra wild (and with a dance floor like
this, it will), the platform’s wooden frame and thick layer of Lexan
plastic make it nearly indestructible.

After earning minor fame at MIT (one of the inventors scored dates
because of his uncanny soldering skills), the students began
upgrading the floor. Their latest model has a prebuilt circuit board
and instructions, so anyone can turn a basement into a
discotheque.
034 MAKE A SONIC TUNNEL OF FIRE




See your favorite song burst into flame with
this classic Rubens’ tube.

This may be one of the best bad ideas of all time, and we have
physicist Heinrich Rubens to thank for it: He found that if you make
a sound at one end of a tube, you get a standing wave equivalent
to the sound’s wavelength inside the tube—and that the best way
to demonstrate this principle is with waves of flame synced with
music. Right on, Heinrich.

MATERIALS
4-inch (10-cm) ventilation ducting
Nail
Drill
Duct tape
Latex sheets
Scissors
Two hose splicers
Epoxy putty
Hose T-connector
Propane tank
Teflon tape
Two 4-inch (10-cm) brackets
Screws for your brackets
Scrap wood
Media player and speakers

STEP 1 Leaving 4 inches (10 cm) at either end, mark off every ½
inch (1.25 cm) down the length of your ducting. (Do it on the side
without the seam.)

STEP 2 Gently tap a nail at each interval, creating divots that will
be easy to drill. Then drill through each resulting depression.

STEP 3 Wrap a strip of duct tape around each end of the tube.
Then cut two squares of latex and tape them across both ends of
the tube, creating an airtight seal.

STEP 4 Select two spots for fuel entry in the seam, each about
one-third of the way across the tube. Tap the locations with a nail
to create depressions, then drill two holes large enough to
accommodate your hose splicers.

STEP 5 Install the hose splicers, securing the edges around the
fuel entry holes with epoxy putty.

STEP 6 Attach the T-connector to the propane nozzle, then the
hose splicers to the T-connector. Wrap the ends of the all the
components with Teflon tape.

STEP 7 Using screws, attach brackets to scrap wood to make a
stand. Then mount the tube onto it.
STEP 8 To use, tape all holes to create a seal. Then pump the
tube full of propane for 2 minutes.

STEP 9 Remove the tape and test the tube by lighting one hole. If
the flames are 1 inch (2.5 cm) high, it’s ready.

STEP 10 Place a speaker as close as possible to one end of the
tube (without actually touching the end’s latex seal). Hit play, and
watch those sound waves ignite.




     WARNING
     Things that shoot flames are highly dangerous—even
     more so when set next to a full jug of propane. Exercise
     extreme caution while building and playing your Rubens’
     tube, and always have a fire extinguisher at the ready.




THE RUBENS TUBE IN ACTION
Why just listen to “Light My Fire” when you can listen to it and see
its sound wave expressed in real flames?




SHOOT A PROPANE-POWERED FIREGUN
Fire enthusiasts have long used propane “poofers” to shoot huge
fireballs for special effects. But for this particular model, PopSci
contributor Vin Marshall tried a new approach that incorporates
striking visual elements as well as a bit of science. It took 40
crazed hours of near-nonstop parts acquisition, construction, and
testing in a friend’s partially collapsed warehouse to finish the
poofer. Why would someone go to all that trouble just to shoot
fireballs over the Philadelphia skyline? The better question is, why
not?




035 TURN YOUR CAMPFIRE GREEN
STEP 1 Pour ¼ inch (6.35 mm) of copper sulfate into a small
paper cup. (You can use common tree-root killers, which contain
copper sulfate.)

STEP 2 Melt old candle stubs in a double boiler, and pour the wax
into the cup over the copper sulfate.

STEP 3 Stir the copper sulfate and wax together until the chemical
is coated.

STEP 4 After it cools, peel off the sides of the paper cup.

STEP 5 When you’re done cooking at your campsite, throw the
copper-sulfate-infused wax into the hottest part of the fire and
watch the green flames start licking.




036 HOLD A FLAMING BALL IN YOUR BARE
HAND
STEP 1 Use scissors to cut away a 2-by-5-inch (5-by-12.5-cm)
strip of cloth from an old T-shirt. Roll the cloth into a ball.

STEP 2 Thread a needle with about 2 feet (60 cm) of sewing
thread.

STEP 3 Push the needle all the way through the fabric ball,
securing the loose end of the fabric strip.

STEP 4 Wind the thread around the ball many, many times. When
you’re almost out of thread, pull the needle through an existing
loop of thread, then tie it off and remove the needle.

STEP 5 Soak the ball in isopropyl alcohol; squeeze out any
excess that may drip onto your hands.

STEP 6 Wash any fluid off your hands, light up your fireball, and
let it blaze around in your hand. (The less-adventurous can put on
heat-resistant gloves.)




037 SET OFF A SPINNING FIRE TORNADO
STEP 1 In the center of a lazy Susan, mold clay into a base for a
fireproof bowl. Press the bowl into the clay, and place pieces of
molding clay along the edges of the lazy Susan.

STEP 2 Measure the lazy Susan’s diameter and roll a piece of
screen into a 36-inch- (90-cm-) high cylinder of the same diameter.
Use straight pins to secure the cylindrical shape.

STEP 3 Pour kerosene onto a rag; place it in the bowl.

STEP 4 With a fire extinguisher nearby, carefully ignite the rag in
the small bowl with a long-handled lighter, then place the screen
cylinder over the lazy Susan, pressing it into the pieces of molding
clay.

STEP 5 Give the lazy Susan a whirl. Stand back and watch
devious, fiery nature at work.

STEP 6 To extinguish, don heat-resistant gloves, wait for the lazy
Susan to slow, and remove the screen. Then snuff out the small
bowl with a larger fireproof bowl.




     WARNING
     All of these fun fiery displays are definitely on the
     dangerous side. Exercise extreme caution when getting
     your pyro on, and always have a fire extinguisher handy.
038 IGNITE A HOMEMADE SPARKLER
STEP 1 Using a rotary tool, make a small hole into the top of a
medicine bottle’s lid.

STEP 2 Fill the bottle about one-fourth of the way with water and
add 1 teaspoon of salt.

STEP 3 Add 1 tablespoon each of powdered dishwashing
detergent and baking soda, and then put the lid on.

STEP 4 Carefully hold the flame of a lighter or match over the hole
until the gas you’ve just created ignites, firing your sparkler.
Celebrate.
039 WREAK HAVOC WITH THE ULTIMATE
SQUIRT GUN




Water guns have never been more fun. No,
really, we mean it.

This wet weapon is way more than a squirt gun; it’s a powerful
water cannon that shoots more than 1 quart (950 mL) of water up
to 50 feet (15 m) in less than 10 seconds. But don’t be a jerk.
Keep your H20 gun’s spray away from other people’s faces.

MATERIALS
Drill
Various PVC parts (see diagram below)
PVC cement
Waterproof grease
Bucket of water

STEP 1 Use a drill to make a ¼-inch (6.35-mm) hole in the center
of one 2-inch (5-cm) cap and a 1¼-inch (3-cm) hole in the center
of the second cap. The first is your nozzle; the second is the piston
guide.
STEP 2 Glue the T-connector to the small pipe with PVC cement.
When gluing, immediately insert the pipe into the fitting and turn it
to distribute the solvent evenly. Hold the joint for about 30 seconds
to make sure it sets; wipe off excess glue with a rag.

STEP 3 Slide the piston guide over the small pipe with the open
end facing away from the T-connector.

STEP 4 Glue the reducer bushing to the small pipe’s end, the
coupler to the reducer, and the 1¼-inch (3-cm) pipe to the coupler
with the PVC cement.

STEP 5 Slide the O-ring over the small 1¼-inch (3-cm) pipe and
glue the 1¼-inch (3-cm) PVC cap to the pipe.

STEP 6 Glue the nozzle onto the big pipe. Let the apparatus dry.

STEP 7 Apply a small glob of waterproof grease to the inside of
the 2-inch (5-cm) PVC pipe. Insert the piston into the body and
push and pull a few times to evenly spread the goop. When it
seems sufficiently lubricated, firmly push the piston guide onto the
body.

STEP 8 To load, use it like a giant syringe: Compress the handle
and stick the huge squirt gun’s end into a bucket of water, then pull
up on the T-connector to draw water into the pipe.

STEP 9 Super-soak somebody near you.




     WARNING
     This thing can really let loose, so be cautious about
     spraying it at living creatures. (Zombies, though, you can
     totally let have it.)




040 MAKE A MINI CATAPULT
STEP 1 Lift up and rotate the nail clipper’s little lever.

STEP 2 Glue the bottle cap onto the lever, leaving a little room for
your fingertip at the very end.

STEP 3 Load it up with supersmall ammo, pull it back, and let go
to launch.
041 PLAY WITH A BIKE-PART SPIROGRAPH
Those mathy whirls of color from your
childhood can be yours all over again.

MATERIALS
Bike chain
Thin plywood
Tape
Pen
Jigsaw
Superglue
Colored pens
An assortment of chain rings

STEP 1 Arrange a bike chain on the plywood in a perfect circle
and tape it down. Faithfully trace around the chain’s outer rim,
being careful not to move it.

STEP 2 Using a jigsaw, cut out the circle and discard it. Line up
the chain so that it fits inside the circular hole.

STEP 3 Use superglue to secure the chain all the way around the
inner edge of the hole in the plywood. Let this dry overnight.

STEP 4 Place the plywood frame over paper. Put a chain ring on
the paper and insert a colored pen through one of its bolt holes to
make contact with the paper.

STEP 5 Keeping your pen in the chain ring’s bolt hole, trace
around the bike chain to lay down an awesome design.
Experiment with chain rings that have different numbers of teeth
for patterns of varying complexity.
042 TURN JUNK MAIL INTO PENCILS
STEP 1 Cut a strip of paper—with colors or a pattern that you like
—so it’s 16½ inches (42 cm) in length and 5 inches (12.5 cm) in
width.

STEP 2 Apply glue along a long edge and apply a piece of
mechanical pencil lead to it, then roll your paper snugly around the
pencil lead.

STEP 3 Continue applying glue every 1 inch (2.5 cm) and rolling
up the paper little by little.

STEP 4 Let the pencil dry overnight. Use a craft knife to sharpen it
and start scribbling.
043 SET UP A TURNTABLE ZOETROPE




See LEGOs come to life with this classic
animation trick.

The world saw its first modern zoetrope in 1833, and since its
invention the device has paved the way to cinema as we know it.
This playful update uses a strobe light to interrupt your view of a
series of still objects as they go around and around on a record
player—causing your eye to perceive them as if they were in
motion. It’s not 1833 anymore, but the effect is still pretty mind-
boggling.

MATERIALS
Protractor
A record to sacrifice
18 LEGO miniature figures
Superglue
Record player
Strobe light

STEP 1 Using the protractor, measure and draw lines every 20
degrees on the sacrificial record. Space out the LEGO figures
around the edge of the record according to these marks, and glue
them down.

STEP 2 Put the LEGO figures in positions of your choosing—think
about creating the look of continuous motion by carefully changing
each one’s position incrementally from that of the one before it.

STEP 3 Set the record player to 33? RPM.

STEP 4 Adjust your strobe light to flash ten times per second and
position it so that it’s pointed at the zoetrope at close range.

STEP 5 Turn out the lights, turn on the record player and the
strobe, and watch those LEGO figurines start dancing, running,
battling, or doing whatever you want them to do.




044 THE REAL IRON MAN SUIT
This homebuilt superhero suit looks as good as
the silver-screen version.

Anthony Le has been a fan of Iron Man since he was a kid. When
he heard that the comic-book superhero was hitting the big screen
in 2008, he was inspired to build his own Iron Man suit. That
version was more of a costume, but his next edition—finished just
in time for the movie’s sequel—edges much closer to the real
thing. With its dent-proof exterior, motorized faceplate, and
spinning mock Gatling gun, his take on the movie’s War Machine
suit could easily frighten a supervillain—not to mention kids in the
theater.

To make the suit, Le—who is a fitness consultant by day—studied
some concept sketches of the suit posted on the Internet. He
focused on the War Machine suit, donned by Stark’s buddy Jim
Rhodes in Iron Man 2, in part because “it just looks more
hardcore.” He used thin, high-impact urethane for the armor,
cutting it into plates and joining them with some 1,500 rivets and
washers. He sculpted a clay helmet mold and then used a mix of
liquid resin to create the final product. He added a replica of the
machine gun on the suit’s shoulder made of PVC pipes and other
materials. But that was just cosmetic work. He also added a small
servo motor that opens the faceplate, as in the movie, and built a
gun out of pipes and a motor. LEDs in the eyes and chest-plate
further add to the illusion.

All the LEDs and the motors that drive the gun and the faceplate
have their own batteries hidden within the suit’s large frame. Inside
the chestplate, Le added a hands-free button that activates the
helmet. When the faceplate is open, he just stands up and points
his arm forward, causing his chest to press against the button,
triggering the servo motors in the helmet to close the mask. This,
in turn, switches on the red LEDs set inside the eye openings,
which are large enough for him to also see out of. To open the
mask up again, he presses another button.

Le wore one of his suits to the Children’s Hospital in Aurora,
Colorado, to cheer up the kids, and the staff was so pleased they
made him his own ID card. The name listed? Iron Man.




  HARD TO MISS
  The material Le used for the armor is thin but takes stress
  well. “You can throw it against the wall, and it won’t even be
  damaged,” he says. Le has a cult following among fans of the
  movie featuring Iron Man—he wore the suit to the theater to
  see Iron Man 2.




045 MIX MAGNETIC SILLY PUTTY
STEP 1 Mix 1 tablespoon of basic craft glue and 1 cup (240 ml) of
water in a plastic bag, then add 1 tablespoon of borax. Squeeze to
make the putty.

STEP 2 Wearing gloves and a face mask, spread out the putty
and sprinkle about 2 tablespoons of iron oxide powder onto it.
Work it in for about 5 minutes.

STEP 3 Introduce a magnet to your putty and watch it move and
change shape.
046 COOK UP FERROFLUID
Believe it or not, this spiky stuff is a fluid. Put it
on a magnet and it goes nuts.

MATERIALS
Syringe
Ferric chloride solution
Distilled water
Steel wool
Coffee filter
Household ammonia
Oleic acid
Kerosene

STEP 1 With a syringe, measure 10 ml of ferric chloride solution
and 10 ml of distilled water into a container.

STEP 2 Add a small piece of steel wool. Stir or swirl the solution
until it turns bright green, then filter it through a coffee filter.

STEP 3 Add 20 ml more ferric chloride solution to your filtered
green solution. While stirring, add 150 ml of ammonia.

STEP 4 In a well-ventilated area, heat the solution to near boiling.
While stirring, add 5 ml of oleic acid. Keep heating until the
ammonia smell is gone (about an hour).

STEP 5 Let cool, and then add 100 ml of kerosene. Stir until the
black color attaches to the kerosene.

STEP 6 Pour off and collect the kerosene layer in a bowl.

STEP 7 Place a magnet under your bowl’s bottom and watch the
weird peaks rise.
047 CATCH A THRILL ON A BACKYARD
COASTER




Sure, it may not do loop-de-loops, but our
lawyers tell us that’s a good thing.

MATERIALS
5-by-5-inch (12.5-by-12.5-cm) wooden posts
Drill
Screws and bolts
4-by-4-inch (10-by-10-cm) wooden posts
2-by-4-inch (5-by-10-cm) boards
Measuring tape
Circular saw
Gray sun-resistant 1½-inch (3.75-cm) PVC pipe
Heat gun
PVC of a slightly smaller diameter that fits snugly inside the main PVC size
Casters fitted with skateboard wheels
Rectangular piece of wood or particleboard
Car seat with seat belt
Rope

STEP 1 Survey your land and choose a spot for your backyard
coaster.

STEP 2 Design your track. Note that you can’t have a hill that is
higher than the previous peak. If you’re creating multiple hills, the
car must continuously build enough energy by descending hills to
make it up subsequent hills and around corners. Try starting with a
downward slope from about 9 feet (2.75 m) followed by a hill that
measures about 6 feet (1.8 m) at its crest. End the track with a
steep uphill that the car won’t be able to climb over, which will stop
it.

STEP 3 Lay down 5-by-5-inch (12.5-by-12.5-cm) posts on the
ground as a base. Screw the posts together with a drill.

STEP 4 Saw the 4-by-4-inch (10-by-10-cm) posts to varying
heights that match your design’s elevation changes. Then screw
the posts along the top of the 5-by-5-inch (12.5-by-12.5-cm) floor
to create your elevation. Leave 1 foot (30 cm) between each post.

STEP 5 Mark and cut 2-by-4-inch (5-by-10-cm) boards into slats
as long as the width of your track. Lay these across the tops of the
4-by-4-inch (10-by-10-cm) posts and screw them into place.

STEP 6 Drill holes through the gray PVC pipe, and then use the
drill to screw through these holes into the sides of the 2-by-4-inch
(5-by-10-cm) boards, forming the rails and sides of your track. Use
a heat gun to mold the PVC to curves. As you go, connect
segments of PVC securely by sliding a 1-foot (30-cm) section of
the smaller diameter pipe into the PVC that’s already in place.
Screw it in, then slide on the new piece and screw that in as well.

STEP 7 To make the coaster car, screw wheels onto the bottom of
a flat piece of wood that’s 3 feet (90 cm) long and about the width
of the track. One set of wheels should roll on top of the PVC and
the other should ride along the outside.

STEP 8 Check to see if the car works by rolling it on the track, and
make adjustments to wheel placement if necessary.

STEP 9 Bolt the car seat equipped with a seat belt onto the
coaster car, leaving room in front for the rider’s tucked legs.

STEP 10 Attach a long piece of rope to the car—you can use this
to pull the coaster backward up the first slope for a rider to board.

STEP 11 Test the roller coaster. Place the car on the track and put
a sack of flour on it to serve as a crash-test dummy. Test more
than once. If the tests are successful, consider someday
cautiously trying it yourself.




     warning
     You’ve seen the movie Jackass, right? You know that part
     where they tell you not to perform any of the stunts seen in
     the movie? That goes for this, too.
WATER-POWERED JET PACK

When Raymond Li decided to build a jet pack propelled by water
instead of rocket fuel, most of his friends thought he had gone
crazy. Worse, engineers told him it would be impossible to manage
the water’s mass and thrust to keep it stable in the air. Li, however,
figured that if he attached a hose to his pack, and put the engine
and water pump in a separate vessel—which ended up being an
extensively modified Jet Ski—that dragged behind him, he could
seriously reduce his weight, and therefore the amount of thrust
needed to stay aloft. In theory, a stiff hose filled with heavy,
pressurized water would also add drag, stabilizing the jet pack for
better forward flight control. It took four prototypes and more than
200 flight tests to get it right. But now, with a mere 30-pound (13.5-
kg) pack, the Jetlev-Flyer generates 430 pounds (195 kg) of thrust
and lets Li fly forward at 22 miles per hour (35 km/h) up to three
stories high. That’s quite an upgrade from your average day at the
lake.




048 SET UP A PINBALL GAME AT HOME
Because arcades can’t stay open all the time,
and you’re out of quarters, anyway.

MATERIALS
Peg-Board
Saw
2x4s
Wood glue
Nails
Hammer
Drill
¾-inch (2-cm) drill bit
½-inch (1.25-cm) drill bit
⅛-inch (3-mm) drill bit
5/16-inch- (8-cm-) diameter hex bolt with nut
⅜-inch- (9.5-mm-) diameter spring
Wood
Wood pegs
Bicycle bell
Rubber bands
Scrap wood
PVC pipe elbows
Rubber hose
Marbles

STEP 1 Use the saw to cut pieces of particleboard according to
the measurements in the diagram.

STEP 2 On the board that serves as a ramp, trace your ball at one
end to create a circular shape. Then add ¼ inch (6.35 mm) all
around this shape, and cut it out.
STEP 3 Build the game using nails and wood glue, making sure
that the ramp fits against the back wall and that the opening is
large enough for the ball to drop in.

STEP 4 Cut a hole into one side of the box so that you can reach
in and grab the ball after scoring tosses.

STEP 5 Stand about 8 feet (2.4 m) away and toss the ball so that
it rolls up the ramp—if it goes in the hole, that’s one point. Any
player who scores may continue until he or she misses; the first to
score 15 points wins.

STEP 6 Toward the bottom of the game, drill through the side
boards to create a ½-inch (1.9-cm) hole in each. Drill another hole
next to the first so that the holes meet, making a long oval hole on
each side of the board.

STEP 7 Mark the center of the oval hole on the top of the board,
then drill into it from above with a ?-inch (3-mm) drill bit. Repeat on
the other side.

STEP 8 Cut two pieces of wood into paddles of your desired
length. Sand the edges.

STEP 9 Drill a ?-inch (3-mm) hole from the top near the ends of
the paddles. Slip the paddles into the holes in the side boards.

STEP 10 Place a nail through the holes in the frame, through the
paddles, and into the holes’ bottom. Tap it with a hammer to
secure them in place. Place a peg on either side of each paddle to
restrict its range.

STEP 11 To create tunnels, nail down rubber hoses sliced in half
lengthwise and PVC pipe elbows, and for good bumper action,
extend rubber bands between pegs or nail scrap wood to the Peg-
Board. If you want spinners, try foam X shapes secured loosely
with a nail. Don’t forget a ramp and bicycle bell.
STEP 12 Load up the launcher with a marble, pull back the bolt,
and release it—let the game begin.




049 Play DIY Skee-Ball
Go analog with a good old-fashioned Skee-Ball
toss.

MATERIALS
1-inch (2.5-cm) particleboard
½-inch (1.25-cm) particleboard
¼-inch (6.35-mm) particleboard
Saw
Wood glue
Nails
Rubber ball
STEP 1 Use the saw to cut the Peg-Board to your desired size to
form the base of the pinball machine.

STEP 2 Measure and cut 2x4s to make a frame. Glue and nail it
into place.

STEP 3 Nail a 2x4 under the top of the frame to prop it up at a
slight angle.

STEP 4 Drill a hole about ½ inch (1.25 cm) in diameter in the
bottom frame piece’s right corner. Insert the hex bolt and slide the
spring over the bolt.

STEP 5 Attach the nut to secure the spring on the bolt. Pull the
bolt down to compress the spring—this is the ball launcher. Place
a piece of scrap wood alongside the bolt to create a guide for the
ball.
050 BUILD A MINT-TIN RACER
STEP 1 Use a drill to make five holes into your tin: two on both of
the tin’s long sides and one in the top corner of the lid.

STEP 2 Measure and cut two wooden sticks so they are long
enough to traverse the width of the mint tin with about ½ inch (1.25
cm) extra on either side.

STEP 3 Slide the axles through the holes in the side of the tin, and
attach bottle-cap “wheels” to the sticks with hot glue.
STEP 4 To deck out your racer with a flag, insert a straw into the
hole in the tin’s top, and tape a triangular flag to the straw’s top.

STEP 5 Detail your racer however you like.




051 SHAKE UP A MARTINI IN A MINT TIN
STEP 1 Drill a hole into one end of the mint tin and insert a plastic
nozzle. (You can buy these in bulk online or at home-improvement
stores.)

STEP 2 Buy or fill two travel-size bottles: one with gin or vodka,
one with vermouth.
STEP 3 Place the booze bottles, a paper cup, and an olive inside
the tin.

STEP 4 When you need an emergency drink, remove all the tin’s
contents and pour the bottles into the tin.

STEP 5 Close the tin and shake it well.

STEP 6 Loosen the nozzle, pour into the cup, and garnish with the
olive.




052 STRUM A MINT-TIN GUITAR
STEP 1 Position the tin so that its label is facing you. Then trace
the stacked ends of three rulers onto the far right side to make a
rectangle.

STEP 2 Using a drill, make a hole in the rectangle on the box’s
side, then cut out the rectangle outline with tin snips.
STEP 3 On the other side of the box, just below the lid’s lip on the
side, make three evenly spaced holes for the guitar strings.
Thread the strings through and knot them off inside the box.

STEP 4 Remove the insides of a cheap ballpoint pen and cut the
clear tube to about the width of your mint tin. Then cut it in half
lengthwise. Make three notches in it for your guitar strings.

STEP 5 Use a hot-glue gun to glue the pen tube facedown onto
the tin lid on the side where you’ve made holes for the strings.

STEP 6 Insert one ruler into the rectangular cutout so that it goes
about halfway into the mint tin. Secure it with a hot-glue gun.

STEP 7 Cut a credit card to the ruler’s width. Bend one edge up
and glue it to the ruler about ½ inch (1.25 cm) from the ruler’s end.

STEP 8 Cut the other two rulers down to 1 inch (2.5 cm) shorter
than the exposed ruler. Glue them on top of the first ruler.

STEP 9 Drill holes for the eyebolts into the end of the bottom ruler.
Insert and secure them with nuts on the ruler’s bottom.

STEP 10 String the strings over the pen tube and tie them off
around the eyebolts, and start strumming the hits.
053 CARRY A POCKET BILLIARD SET
STEP 1 Use a craft knife to cut a piece of foam to fit inside a mint
tin. It should be just about level with the tin’s top.

STEP 2 Remove the foam and place it on green felt. Trace around
it, then cut out the shape. Test it to make sure that it fits nicely
inside the tin.

STEP 3 Take a small bead (aka, one of your pool balls) and place
it in a corner of the felt. Cut a hole around it to make a pocket.
Then trace the scrap to make pockets in the other three corners.

STEP 4 Glue the felt down onto the foam. Trace and cut the
pocket shapes out of the foam, too.

STEP 5 Assemble the seven beads into a triangle. Place a piece
of copper wire along one side of the triangle; mark its length.
STEP 6 Use this measurement to fold the wire into a triangle
shape with sides of equal length.

STEP 7 Cut a small-diameter copper rod to make a pool cue.

STEP 8 Rack ‘em up wherever you go.




054 BUILD A MINI ARCADE GAME




No room for a full-on console? Make a mini
version for countertop play.

MATERIALS
Netbook
½-inch (1.25-cm) medium density fiberboard
Ruler
Screws
Screwdriver
Hinge
Hole saw
Buttons and joystick
Label paper
Paint
Table saw with a plastic- cutting blade
Plexiglas
I-PAC 2
Electrical wire
Soldering iron and solder
Hot-glue gun
USB cable
Legal arcade software

STEP 1 Take apart your netbook and measure its LCD screen,
obtaining the dimensions on which you’ll base your arcade design.

STEP 2 Measure and cut ten pieces of medium-density fiberboard
for the arcade’s body (one each for the back, top, bottom, and
sides) and five pieces for the front.

STEP 3 Screw it together. Mount a hinge in the back so you’ll be
able to open it up and access your electronics.

STEP 4 Measure and cut holes in the front of the arcade for the
buttons and joystick using the hole saw.

STEP 5 Come up with a design for your arcade and print it on the
label paper. Paint the arcade your desired color, then apply your
label to the arcade.

STEP 6 Use the table saw with a plastic-cutting blade to cut
Plexiglas pieces that fit over the pieces of board, and screw them
over the label paper to protect the design.

STEP 7 Place the buttons and joystick and wire them according to
the I-PAC 2’s instructions.

STEP 8 Cut an additional piece of fiberboard to mount behind the
LCD, propping the LCD up inside of the arcade. Make a hole in
this board for wires.

STEP 9 Use the table saw to cut a piece of Plexiglas and mount it
in front of the LCD.

STEP 10 Mount the I-PAC 2 and the base of the netbook inside
the back panel of the arcade with hot glue.

STEP 11 Solder the LCD wire and USB wire directly to the I-PAC 2
board.

STEP 12 Open the arcade’s back and turn on the netbook.
Download and install legal arcade software, and get your game
on.




055 CINCH A NINTENDO-CONTROLLER BELT
STEP 1 Use a screwdriver to open up the back of the controller
and cut off the cord where it connects to the circuit board.
Reassemble the controller.

STEP 2 Cut the adhesive Velcro to fit the surface of the belt
buckle.

STEP 3 Adhere one piece of Velcro to the buckle and the other
piece to the back of the controller.

STEP 4 Hold your pants up, nerd.
THE LEGO PINBALL MACHINE

In the hands of Netherlanders Gerrit Bronsveld and Martijn
Boogaarts, LEGOs are no kid’s toy. The duo’s hobby is piecing
together thousands of colored bricks—and other LEGO-made
components, including programmable computers—into complex
creations. Twenty-five LEGO hockey sets and 13 LEGO
computers make up this arcade with a rubber band–powered
kicker and sensor-activated bumpers, targets, and gates. A round
will set you back 50 cents.
056 SET UP A SUPERSIZE GAME OF
OPERATION




This classic kids’ game may be all grown up,
but it’ll still leave you in stitches.

MATERIALS
Large, flat box
Paint
Seven “body parts”
Box cutter
Disposable tin oven trays
Tape
Gray paper
Wire strippers
Buzzer
Three AA batteries and holder
Threaded electrical wire
Five red LEDs
Five 100-ohm resistors
Soldering iron and solder
Metal tongs
Multimeter
Clear ping-pong ball, cut in half

STEP 1 Paint your box and sketch an outline of the patient’s body,
adding as much detail as you want.
STEP 2 Outline the body parts you’ll be “surgically removing.” Add
at least ½ inch (1.25 cm) around the outlines, then use a box
cutter to cut them out. Cut a hole for the nose that can fit all five
LEDs, and a hole in the side of the box so you can easily access
its interior.

STEP 3 Cut up and/or combine the oven trays so that they fit
closely around each body part, then tape them under the holes.
Line the trays’ bottoms with gray paper.

STEP 4 Strip plastic off the ends of the buzzer’s wires and those
of your battery holder, then connect the buzzer’s positive end to
the battery pack’s positive end.

STEP 5 Twist each positive leg of the five LEDs to a resistor, then
wire all five resistors to a length of threaded electrical wire. Solder
this wire to the battery holder’s positive wire.

STEP 6 Twist the buzzer’s negative wire to each LED’s negative
leg. Solder in place.

STEP 7 Cut a piece of electrical wire long enough to extend from
underneath the “patient’s” head to outside the box, where the
players will pull it all over the board. Attach one end of this wire to
the buzzer’s negative wire.

STEP 8 Strip the protective coating on the tongs, then twist the
other end of the wire attached to the buzzer’s negative wire
around the bare space. Tape it in place.

STEP 9 To wire the oven tins, cut a long electrical wire for each,
making sure that it will reach the battery pack’s location near the
head. Tape each wire to an oven tin, then connect it to the battery
pack’s negative wire.

STEP 10 Tape the red LEDs in the hole for the nose and glue half
of a ping-pong ball on top. Tape the battery pack and buzzer
nearby.

STEP 11 Decorate your patient, drop body parts into the tins, and
page your friends to come “operate.”




057 Play Giant Checkers
Fact: If something is fun, making it larger
makes it even more fun.

MATERIALS
Particleboard
Saw
Paint
U-shaped nails
Two pole hooks

STEP 1 Cut nine 4-foot- (1.2-m-) square pieces of particleboard,
and arrange them in a 12-foot (3.6-m) square. (Using segments
will allow you to store and transport the board.)

STEP 2 Mark a grid of squares that each measure 1 foot (30 cm).
Paint the squares in alternating colors of your choice.

STEP 3 Use a saw to cut 24 discs that measure 8 inches (20 cm)
in circumference. Paint half the discs one color, half another color.

STEP 4 Hammer a U-shaped nail partway into the center of each
disc.

STEP 5 Use the pole hooks to pick up and move playing pieces by
the nail loops.
058 MAKE A REFLECTION HOLOGRAM
Holograms aren’t just for the holodeck. Make a
3D image of an object near you.

MATERIALS
Class 3A laser diode with an output of 3 to 4 mW
Tweezers
Battery pack
Wooden clothespin
Holography processing and development kit
Distilled water
A small solid object
PFG-03M 2½-by-2½-inch (6.35-by-6.35-cm) holographic plates
Cardboard
Matte black spray paint

STEP 1 Open up the laser diode and, using a pair of tweezers,
remove the lens and the small tension spring. Hook the diode up
to a battery pack.

STEP 2 Secure the clothespin in an upright position, and prop the
laser diode between the clothespin’s prongs.

STEP 3 Prepare the chemical processing solutions with distilled
water and lay out the trays according to the holography processing
and developing kit’s instructions.

STEP 4 Set up the object that you want a hologram of 15 inches
(40 cm) from the laser. Glue or tape it down if you’re concerned
about movement.

STEP 5 Make the room fairly dark, andadjust the laser in its holder
so that the beam spreads out horizontally, with the object centered
in its light.
STEP 6 Place cardboard in front of the laser to block light from
reaching the object.

STEP 7 In the darkest area, remove a holographic plate from its
container and (after immediately closing the container) lean the
holographic plate against the object so that the sticky, emulsion-
coated side touches it.

STEP 8 Request that everyone in the room hold still, and lift the
piece of cardboard to expose the holographic plate to the laser
light for about 20 seconds. Replace the cardboard.

STEP 9 Process the exposed holographic plate according to the
holography kit’s instructions, and then spray-paint the sticky side
of the plate black.

STEP 10 When the plate is dry, place it in front of any
incandescent (unfrosted) light source—a flashlight or the sun, for
instance—to see the hologram take shape.
059 WIELD A DIY LIGHT SABER




Now the force can always be with you, too.

MATERIALS
10-inch (25-cm) piece of 1.25 inch (3-cm) PVC pipe
Black spray paint
Drill
4 feet (1.2 m) of electrical wire
Wire strippers
30 LEDs
Pliers
2½-foot (75-cm) length of ½-inch (2-cm) frosted polycarbonate tube
Two AA batteries
Soldering iron and solder
On/off switch
Duct tape

STEP 1 Spray-paint the PVC pipe black—this is your handle—
then drill a hole in it for the on/off switch.

STEP 2 Cut two 2-foot (60-cm) lengths of electrical wire and strip
both.

STEP 3 Attach the positive leads of the LEDs down the first wire,
evenly spacing them. Then attach the LEDs’ negative leads to the
other stripped wire. Use pliers to crimp the LEDs’ legs, securing
them to the wires.

STEP 4 Drill a hole in the polycarbonate tube’s top. Pull the string
of LEDs into the tube through the other end, thread its wire
through the hole, and tie it off.
STEP 5 Place the batteries next to each other with their polarities
facing opposite directions. Attach a piece of wire across their ports
with aluminum-foil duct tape.

STEP 6 Solder two wires to the on/off switch and thread it through
the hole for the switch in the handle, first bringing it up through the
hole in the bottom.

STEP 7 Insert the tube into the handle so that the wires from both
the LED string and the switch dangle out of the handle’s end. Tape
the handle and tube together.

STEP 8 Solder the negative wires from the switch and LED string
to the battery pack’s negative port, and the positive wires from
both to the positive port.

STEP 9 Duct-tape the handle’s bottom to hold the battery pack
inside. Turn it on and go get a Sith.
060 HACK YOUR MAGIC 8 BALL




Can you make this fortune-telling gizmo say
whatever you want? It is decidedly so.

MATERIALS
Magic 8 Ball
Plexiglas cutter
Screwdriver
Razor
Sandpaper
Extra-fine permanent marker
Superglue

STEP 1 Use a Plexiglas cutter to cut through the glue at the ball’s
equatorial seam, then carefully pry it open.

STEP 2 Inside there’s a cylinder of blue dye. Remove the screws
that hold it in place, and then pour out and reserve the liquid. Fish
the answer ball out.

STEP 3 Pat the answer ball dry. Use a razor and sandpaper to
scrape off the existing messages.

STEP 4 Write the messages you desire on the ball using an extra-
fine permanent marker. Wait for the ink to dry.
STEP 5 Put the answer ball inside the cylinder, and then transfer
the blue liquid back into the cylinder, too.

STEP 6 Glue the cap on the cylinder and reinsert it inside the two
halves of the Magic 8 Ball.

STEP 7 Glue the ball back together, let it dry, and enjoy rewriting
the future.




061 GO ANYWHERE WITH VIRTUAL-REALITY
GLASSES
. . . anywhere that Google Street View goes, that
is.

MATERIALS
Safety goggles
Large piece of cardboard
Pencil
Craft knife
Tape
Smartphone

STEP 1 Lay the safety goggles on the cardboard so that they’re
facing forward. Trace around the shape, adding at least 2 inches
(5 cm) in front.

STEP 2 Roll the goggles up so that they’re resting on an end.
Trace around that side, adding extra space again.

STEP 3 Using the craft knife, cut out your tracing as one piece,
then fold it so you have a four-sided rectangular tube that fits
perfectly around your goggles. Secure it with tape and slide the
goggles just inside.

STEP 4 On a separate piece of cardboard, trace the cardboard
box’s front, leaving 1-inch (2.5-cm) tabs on either side. Cut it out,
then trace your smartphone onto its center. Cut out the shape of
your phone, making a window, and insert this cardboard piece into
the rectangular tube opposite the goggles.

STEP 5 Dial up Google Street View and locate a place you’ve
always wanted to go and tape your phone over the window.

STEP 6 Don your virtual-reality glasses, and take a walk
someplace far, far away.
062 FILE-SHARE WITH A USB DEAD DROP
Camouflage a USB flash drive so that you can
swap files on the sly.

MATERIALS
USB flash drive
Screwdriver
Plumber’s tape
Drill with masonry bit
Cement
Paint, if desired

STEP 1 Stick your USB drive into your computer’s port and upload
any files you want to share, then remove it.

STEP 2 Scout for a good place to put your dead drop. You may
need a drill with a masonry bit to make a hole in concrete, like the
one you see here.

STEP 3 Slide your USB inside and use cement to secure it in
place. Don’t get any cement on the USB itself. If you want extra
camouflage, paint a bit around it.

STEP 4 Scram—and let your contacts know where the secret docs
are. To retrieve files from a dead drop, just line your laptop’s USB
port up with the USB drive and slide them together.
063 BUILD A BRISTLEBOT
All the fun of a hyperactive pet, minus all the
annoying shedding.

MATERIALS
Toothbrush with angled bristles
Rotary tool
Double-sided foam tape
Pager motor
Glue
Coin battery
Electrical tape
Decorations

STEP 1 Use a rotary tool to cut the head off a toothbrush. Apply
double-sided foam tape to the back.

STEP 2 Salvage a pager motor with two wires and connect the
wires to a coin battery, positive to positive and negative to
negative. Tape the wires in place on the battery with electrical
tape.

STEP 3 Add decorations, then attach the motor and battery to the
foam tape on the toothbrush. Watch the robot merrily frolic.
064 MAKE A MINI WHIRLING MOTOR
Send current up over a magnetic field for some
head-spinning results.

MATERIALS
6 feet (2 m) of enameled copper wire
C battery
Wire strippers
Electrical tape
Two safety pins
AA battery
Magnet

STEP 1 Wrap the wire several times around the C battery, leaving
a few inches of excess at each end.

STEP 2 Slide the coil you just made off the battery. Pull one end of
the excess wire through the coil, and then wrap it multiple times
around the coil to hold it together. Leave about 1 inch (2.5 cm) of
excess. Repeat with the other end of the wire.

STEP 3 Strip the bits of wire extending from the coil.
STEP 4 Using electrical tape, secure safety pins to both ends of
the AA battery with the hinge ends sticking up.

STEP 5 Stick the coil’s stripped ends through the holes in the
hinge ends so the coil is centered over the battery.

STEP 6 Place the magnet on top of the battery, then give the coil a
push and watch it spin.




065 RIG AN ANIMATRONIC HAND
Need an extra hand? Build one—just don’t
blame us if it gets you in trouble.

MATERIALS
Marker
Paper
Plastic tubing
Craft knife
Nylon string
Black tape
CD case
Hot-glue gun
Plastic clothes hanger
Cell foam
Glove, if desired
STEP 1 Outline your hand with a marker on a piece of paper, and
mark where the joints and knuckles are.

STEP 2 Cut five “fingers” from the plastic tubing—they should be
as long as the distance from your middle fingertip to your wrist.

STEP 3 Cut a V-shaped notch in the underside of each finger to
make joints.

STEP 4 Insert a 3-foot (90-cm) length of nylon string into each
finger. To secure the string, pull it all the way out of the fingertip,
then loop it through the notch closest to the fingertip and tie a knot.
Tape it down at the fingertip and at the wrist.

STEP 5 Snap off a thin plastic strip from the spine of a salvaged
CD case. Place the plastic strip over the four fingers about where
they would meet the top of the hand. Hot-glue the strip to the
fingers.

STEP 6 Place the hand palm up. Apply tape around the base of
the fingers, then hot-glue the thumb to them (just don’t melt the
plastic). Remove the tape when dry.

STEP 7 Cut another length of tubing 1 foot (30 cm) long. Thread
each of the strings extending out of the wrist end of the finger
tubes through the new tube.

STEP 8 Cut another piece of plastic from the CD case and glue it
so it straddles the finger tubes and the arm tube, stabilizing the
wrist.

STEP 9 To make a handle, cut open a plastic coat hanger and
glue the pieces together into a square shape. Then glue it to the
end of the arm.

STEP 10 Give your new hand the gift of human touch by applying
thin pieces of foam to the fingertips and the palm of the hand. Put
a glove on it if you like.

STEP 11 Make loops in the ends of all the finger strings using tape
or knots. Hold one end of the square handle against the palm of
your own hand, then insert your fingers into these loops and
practice gently tugging on them to make the hand move creepily
about.
066 THE ELECTRIC GIRAFFE
It walks, it blinks, it seats six, and it blasts
Kraftwerk. Meet one man’s enormous pet
project.

It started with a 7-inch (18-cm) walking toy giraffe and a desire to
see Burning Man—the annual art-and-rave party in the desert in
Black Rock, Nevada—from a higher vantage point. A year later,
Lindsay Lawlor rode into the desert art festival atop Rave Raffe, a
1,700-pound (771-kg) robotic giraffe sporting 40 strobes, 400
LEDs, and bone-shaking speakers.

Lawlor wanted his Burning Man ride to be a true walking vehicle,
so he copied the small toy’s locomotion system on a massive
scale. The front and back legs opposite each other step ahead at
the same time, propelled by an electric motor. When those legs
land, hydraulic brakes lock the wheeled feet, and the other two
legs take a step. Canting from side to side, Raffe lumbers ahead
at about 1 mile per hour (1.6 km/h). A 12-horsepower propane
engine runs only to recharge the batteries, so the beast is quiet
and efficient, while a pneumatic pump raises and lowers the
giraffe’s massive neck. When Lawlor let Raffe shuffle off alone in
the desert, it walked for 8 hours.

Since the giraffe’s debut, Lawlor (a part-time laser-light-show
designer) has added new features, including computer-controlled
flashing giraffe spots, an electroluminescent circulatory system,
and a gas grill.
067 CREATE AUDIO ART OUT OF CASSETTE
TAPE




Get your John Cage on with a hack that’s half
musical instrument, half graffiti.

MATERIALS
Cassette player and recorder
Screwdriver
Wire strippers
Electrical wire
Scissors
Rubber thimble
Superglue
Glove
Project box
Drill
On/off switch
Soldering iron and solder
Battery and battery holder
Velcro
Strips of audio tape

STEP 1 Pop open the cassette player’s door. Push the play button
to make a metal mechanical component called the playhead slide
down. Remove the screws securing the playhead.

STEP 2 Turn your attention to the cassette player’s back. Remove
all the screws and open up the case. Take a good look at the
circuit board, noting where the playhead, speaker, and battery
leads connect.

STEP 3 Unscrew and extract the circuit board with the speaker
and playhead attached. Detach the drive motor and microphone
from the circuitry itself.

STEP 4 Find the contacts that move together when you hit the
play button. Sever the wires connecting them to the play button,
but not the ones to the circuit board.

STEP 5 Cut the wires that connect the playhead and speaker to
the circuit board.

STEP 6 Cut holes in the rubber thimble and thread the playhead’s
wires through them. Glue the playhead’s base to the end of the
thimble, and then glue the thimble over the finger of a glove.

STEP 7 Fit the circuit board into the project box, and drill holes
into one side to thread the playhead’s wires through. Reattach the
wires to the circuit board.

STEP 8 Drill two holes in the project box for the on/off switch’s
wires. Solder these to the wires that the play button formerly
controlled (they were connected to the contacts removed in step
4). Glue the switch to the box.

STEP 9 Cut a larger hole on top of the project box and super-glue
the tape recorder’s original speaker in the box. Reconnect the
speaker’s wiring to the circuit board.

STEP 10 Put the battery holder inside the project box. Attach the
holder’s wires to the circuit board where its original battery
terminals were connected.

STEP 11 Attach the project box to the back of the glove with
Velcro. The wire leading to the playhead on your fingertip should
allow for hand and finger movement. If necessary, splice in extra
electrical wire.

STEP 12 Take apart a cassette tape and remove its tape from the
spools. Arrange the tape on an interior wall.

STEP 13 Place batteries into the battery holder, turn the switch on,
and run the playhead over strips of audio tape. Experiment with
speed—nail the right tempo, and you’ll hear the original recording.
068 SCRATCH A PIZZA-BOX TURNTABLE
STEP 1 Cut a small hole in your pizza box’s lid.

STEP 2Tape your optical mouse inside the lid so that its eye points
up through the hole when you close the box.

STEP 3Cut a cardboard disc and attach it to the box using a
pushpin so that it can spin around over the mouse’s eye.

STEP 4Open your mixing software and scratch away.




069 PIRATE A VINYL RECORD
If you live in fear of scratching a super-rare
record, this silicone mold is for you.
MATERIALS
Four wood boards 14¼ inches (36.5 cm) in length
Nails
Hammer
Glass plate
Caulking
Record
Dowel
Silicone rubber designed for mold making
Casting resin

STEP 1 Nail together the boards to make a square wood frame.
Place the frame on the glass plate, and seal around the inside
edge with caulking.

STEP 2 Put the record you want to copy inside the frame on the
glass plate—the side you want to copy should be face up. Fit a
dowel into the record’s hole.

STEP 3 Prepare the silicone rubber and pour it into the mold. Let it
dry overnight.

STEP 4 Peel off the silicone mold, then trim any excess from
around its edges.

STEP 5 Mix the casting resin and pour it into the silicone mold.
Once it’s set, loosen the cast and remove.

STEP 6 Pop your repro record onto your record player and hit
play.
070 CRAFT A BOOM BOX DUFFEL BAG
STEP 1 Create a simple image of a boom box, and draw or print it
onto contact paper to create a stencil. The boom box’s speakers
should be more or less the same size as your speakers, which are
best if they’re of the cheap desktop variety.

STEP 2 Using a craft knife, carefully cut out the stencil.

STEP 3 Lay the duffel bag flat and remove the back of the contact
paper. Smooth the contact paper over the fabric.

STEP 4 Squeeze out a line of paint at the top of the stencil, and
use a piece of cardboard to spread the paint over it. Repeat until
the paint is well distributed. Remove the stencil.
STEP 5 After the paint has dried, cut two holes slightly smaller
than your speakers out of the design. These are the holes for the
speakers.

STEP 6 Remove the speakers’ backs and slide the speakers into
the holes from the outside. Reattach the backs with the same
screws, sandwiching the fabric.

STEP 7 Plug the speakers into your portable media player,
shoulder up the bag, and pump some jams.




071 MAKE YOUR TIE GLOW IN THE DARK
STEP 1 Use a needle to poke a hole into the end of a tie where
the EL (electroluminescent)wire will enter. It’s best to use heavy-
duty fabrics and to follow the seams.

STEP 2 Sew a piece of Velcro onto the tie and attach another
piece to a battery pack. (We fit ours at the end of the tie.)

STEP 3 Draw a design, lay EL wire over the sketch, and tape it to
the tie.

STEP 4 Measure heavy-duty fishing line that’s more than twice the
length of your EL wire. Thread a sturdy needle with the line and
make a knot at its end.

STEP 5 Sew the wire down, securing it every ½ inch (1.25 cm).
Remove the tape.

STEP 6 Plug the wire into the battery pack and never wear a
boring tie again.




072 PUT HEAD-PHONES IN YOUR HOODIE
STEP 1 Use a craft knife to carefully detach the speakers from a
headphone band, keeping the ear cushions and speakers (and the
wire between them and the one that runs to a media player) intact.

STEP 2 Put on a lined hoodie. Safety-pin the ear cushions in place
and test that they fit comfortably.

STEP 3 With a heavy-duty needle, sew four strips of Velcro onto
each ear cushion’s spot in the hoodie, and four more strips to the
back of each ear cushion.

STEP 4 Cut a slit in the lower center of the hood where the
speakers’ wires will join and enter the lining.

STEP 5 Cut a slit into the lower corner of the hoodie’s front where
the cord will come out.

STEP 6 Check to make sure your wire is long enough to reach the
incision in the jacket’s front. If it’s not, desolder the cord and solder
on a longer one.

STEP 7 Attach the speakers to the Velcro and feed the cord into
the hood’s lining and out the front.

STEP 8 Pull up your hood and get skulking. To launder, detach the
ear cushions and pull out the cord.
073 USE A GLOVE ON A TOUCH SCREEN
STEP 1 Thread a sturdy needle with 1 foot (30 cm) of conductive
thread.

STEP 2 On the outside of a glove’s pointer finger, sew a few
stitches—enough to cover an area of about ¼ inch (6.35 mm) in
diameter.

STEP 3 Turn the glove inside out, and sew three to five stitches.
Allow some extra thread to dangle—this will ensure that your
finger touches the conductive thread, completing a mini circuit and
allowing the screen to pick up on your gestures.

STEP 4 Swipe and tap away. If you find that typing with your glove
often results in hitting neighboring letters, pull out a few threads
from the outside of the fingertip.
074 PUMP JAMS THROUGH AN OLD-SCHOOL
PHONOGRAPH




This phonograph probably hasn’t played any
new music since Stravinsky. Give it new life
with this modernizing mod.

MATERIALS
Wooden box
Drill with a hole bit
Felt
Miniature mono amplifier with tone control
Transformer for the amplifier
Two potentiometer knobs
3.5-mm stereo socket
Power plug
Power switch
Speaker
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical wire
Hot-glue gun
Brass horn from an old phonograph
Media player

STEP 1 Measure and cut two holes in the top of your box: one for
the brass horn and a smaller one for the stereo socket.

STEP 2 Measure the box’s inside and cut felt to those dimensions,
then line the box with felt—it will make for better sound.

STEP 3 Set up the electronics according to the diagram, drilling
holes for the power source, potentiometers, and power switch as
you go.

STEP 4 Place the horn in its hole and hot-glue it in place. Sand
and varnish the box, if you desire.

STEP 5 Close up the box, plug your media device into the stereo
socket, and plug the contraption’s power cable into an outlet.

STEP 6 Enjoy the sweet, sweet sound of anachronism.
075 AMPLIFY MUSIC WITH PAPER CUPS
STEP 1 Turn one paper cup upside down and stick a toothpick
through the bottom.

STEP 2 Put another cup on top of it so that it rests perpendicular
to the first cup and is secured by the toothpick.

STEP 3 Cut a hole into the bottom of the top cup, and insert an
earbud from your media player.

STEP 4 Repeat with the other two cups, then listen to your favorite
tunes in stereo.
076 MAKE CUSTOM-FIT EARBUDS
Because anything you stick in your ear every
day should be comfortable.

MATERIALS
Earbuds
Craft knife
Silicone putty

STEP 1 Use a craft knife to remove the stock tip (usually made of
foam or rubber) that your buds came with.

STEP 2 Follow the instructions on your putty package to get the
putty ready.

STEP 3 Pull up on the tip of an ear and, with your mouth open,
press some putty in gently, folding in or removing the excess to
create a flush, clean fit.

STEP 4 With the putty still in, insert the bud.

STEP 5 After the silicone has set (about 10 minutes), remove the
mold by gently twisting it out of your ear.

STEP 6 Gently pull the bud out of the mold and use the craft knife
to make a small hole in the mold to allow sound to come through.
Reinsert the bud.

STEP 7 Repeat the entire process on the other earbud and enjoy
a personalized fit.




077 PUT A NEW SPIN ON AN OLD CD
In the age of MP3s, most people have a lot of
old CDs lying around. Here’s what to do with
them.

 EASY SPINNING TOP
 Using a hot-glue gun, secure a large marble to the underside
 of a compact disc, right under the hole. Glue a plastic bottle
 cap to the top and give it a whirl.

 BEER SPILL BLOCKER
 Put a CD over your beer bottle so the bottle’s neck sticks up
 through the CD’s hole. Now when you knock the bottle over
 accidentally, the CD will prevent it from tipping all the way
 over—and spilling your brew.

 ULTIMATE (COMPACT) DISC GOLF
 This one’s truly easy: Take an old CD and throw it around a
 disc golf course with some friends. Just don’t throw it at your
 friends.

 SUPERSHINY COASTERS
 Cover compact discs with felt and use them as coasters.
 Make sure you cover the side with the artist’s information on it
 —you don’t want anyone knowing you once paid actual
 money for that Third Eye Blind CD, do you?

 AIR HOCKEY IN A PINCH
 Place a CD on a table about the size of, well, an air hockey
 table, and mark goal zones with tape. Stand across from your
 opponent, seize a CD spindle, and use it as an air hockey
 mallet to swat the CD back and forth.
078 GET YOUR AIR DRUM ON WITH
ELECTRIFIED DRUMSTICKS




Now the masses can finally hear your brilliant
air drumming.

This very cool DIY drumming setup uses an Arduino and a MIDI—
that’s short for “musical instrument digital interface”—device to
create a drum kit sound without the drum kit price tag. Move the
drumsticks to hit the snare or cymbal; tap your feet to hear the
bass or hi-hat.
MATERIALS
Two 1 ½-inch (3.75-cm) wooden dowels, about 1 foot (30 cm) in length
Drill
Eight USB female type A connectors
Three ADXL335 accelerometers
Electrical wire
Wire strippers
Soldering iron and solder
Two 1 ½-inch (3.75-cm) vinyl end caps
Rubber-soled shoes you don’t mind donating to the cause
Photocell
47k-ohm resistor
Four USB male-to-male type A cables
Arduino UNO
Five-pin DIN connector
5-volt DC-power supply with 2.1mm jack
USB-to-MIDI interface
Computer

STEP 1 Drill a hole through the two dowels—these will be your
drumsticks. In each drumstick, widen the holes to fit a USB female
connector at one end and an accelerometer at the other end.

STEP 2 Follow the circuitry diagram to solder together your
cymbal and snare, housing their circuitry in the left and right
drumstricks, respectively. Cover the ends of the dowels with vinyl
end caps.

STEP 3 Make a hole through the rubber sole of each shoe, drilling
from the heel to the toe. Widen the holes to fit a USB female
socket at both heels, an accelerometer near the toe of the left
shoe, and a photocell near the toe of the right shoe.

STEP 4 The left shoe will function as your bass drum pedal, while
the right will work as a hi-hat pedal. Follow the circuitry diagram to
attach their components.
STEP 5 Use the male-to-male USB connectors to attach both the
drumsticks and the shoes to the remaining four USB female
connectors. Attach these USB ports to the Arduino UNO and the
drumsticks and shoes to the five-pin DIN connector according to
the circuitry diagram.

STEP 6 Download the drum kit code from
popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks. Program your Arduino with the
code and start running it.

STEP 7 Plug your MIDI device into the DIN port, then connect the
MIDI device to your computer. Plug the 5-volt DC-power supply
into a wall outlet.

STEP 8 Slip the shoes onto your feet, pick up your sticks, and
drum away. Head banging is encouraged.
079 Amuse Yourself with a Flipperdinger
Make uncles everywhere jealous with this dorky
device, which makes a ball hover in midair.

MATERIALS
Putty
Long hollow reed
Knife
Smaller hollow reed
Acorn cap
Glue
Small, lightweight ball

STEP 1 Put putty into one end of the long reed, making an airtight
seal. Near this end, make a hole through the reed. Stick the
smaller reed into this hole, making a nozzle.

STEP 2 Remove the cup-shaped cap of an acorn and poke a hole
in its center. Then fit the cup over the nozzle and secure it with
glue.

STEP 3 Place the ball in the acorn cap and blow lightly but
steadily into the open end of the reed. When done right, the ball
rises slowly on a jet of air, hovering above the nozzle. As you ease
off, the ball settles back into the cap, to the wonderment of all.
080 PLAY A POCKET THEREMIN




Throw together this pint-size, light-sensitive
theremin for spooky sound effects on the
cheap.
MATERIALS
Two 555 IC timers
Two photocells
Two 0.01-mF capacitors
1k-ohm resistor
5k-ohm potentiometer
2-position PCB terminal
8k-ohm, 1-inch (2.5-cm) speaker
9-volt battery snap
Electrical wire
Soldering iron and solder
Drill
Project box
9-volt battery

Remember those eerie sci-fi soundtracks from the 1950s?
Chances are those oscillating noises were generated by a
theremin. Designed by Russian physicist Léon Theremin and
popularized by Robert Moog, a full-fledged theremin will set you
back $400. Or you can build this pocket-size version—it’s light-
sensitive, so play it in subdued lighting for the best sound effects.

STEP 1 Wire your circuit according to the circuitry diagram below,
soldering your connections. Keep the wiring loose enough that you
can insert it into the box.

STEP 2 Drill nine holes in the sides of the project box, spaced to
match the circuitry diagram.

STEP 3 Insert the circuit inside the project box. Thread the loose
wires through the holes in the box.

STEP 4 Solder on the photocells, potentiometer, speaker, and
battery snap.

STEP 5 Connect the snap to the 9-volt battery. You should
immediately hear an eerie noise. If you don’t, check your wiring for
faulty connections.

STEP 6 Head to a spot with low light and, to produce a wide
variety of sounds, move your hands over the theremin’s photocells
to vary the frequency and pitch of the output.

STEP 7 Now go film your own retro sci-fi flick; you’ve already got
the sound effects in your pocket.




MAKING MUSIC WITH LASERS

Playing the harp isn’t the most high-tech pastime—unless, like
Stephen Hobley, you use lasers in place of the strings. Though not
the first home-built laser harp, Hobley’s creation is unquestionably
the coolest. Played by disrupting the laser beams with the hands,
it can produce just about any sound. Better yet, it’s also a fully
functioning controller for a version of Guitar Hero.
081 CUSTOMIZE YOUR WELCOME MAT
STEP 1 Use a box cutter to incise a 2-inch (5-cm) border in three
welcome mats. Set the border aside.

STEP 2 Cut uniformly sized squares from each welcome mat.

STEP 3 Make stencils for each alphabet letter. Use spray-paint to
stencil the squares with letters. Leave some blank.

STEP 4 Use one of the borders as a frame and fill it with letters
and blank spaces of your choosing.
082 ORGANIZE YOUR ENTRYWAY WITH
RECYCLED CANS
Make can cubbies for all those scarves, gloves,
hats, and wallets.

MATERIALS
Assortment of cans
Drill
Several screws

STEP 1 Choose an assortment of can types and sizes—paint
cans, soup cans, and so on. Clean them all well.

STEP 2 Use a drill to make two holes in each can’s base, both
directly across from each other. (If your can has a handle, be sure
to drill your holes so the handle will hang down toward the floor.)
STEP 3 Mark stud positions on your entryway wall. Screw through
each can’s top hole first (larger cans will need to be attached to
studs). Then straighten the cans and screw through the bottom
holes.

STEP 4 Hang stuff on and put things inside the cans.
083 GIVE A DOORKNOB A NEW SPIN
Despite the saying, a doorknob is only as dumb
as you are. Repurpose this ubiquitous fixture
for utility and fun.
084 SET UP A SECRET DOOR




You don’t have to be an action-movie character
to have a private passage.

Contrary to what Batman would have you believe, building a
hidden doorway isn’t very hard. All you need is a room that leads
into another room, three bookcases you don’t mind modding, and
a few pieces of hardware. Let the vanishing acts begin.

MATERIALS
Drill
Rolling caster
Three matching bookcases
Saw
Bolts
Drill
Three hinges with screws
Chalk
Two pieces of wood trim
Wood glue
Six magnets

STEP 1 Using a drill, attach a rolling caster to the bottom left side
of the bookcase that you plan on putting in the middle—the one
that will swing back into your lair.

STEP 2 Once the caster is installed, check to see if the bookcase
is the same height as the other two. If not, saw off some trim along
the bottom.

STEP 3 Mount one of the other bookcases to the wall just to the
right of the doorway, using multiple bolts and washers to secure it
to the ceiling or through a wall stud.

STEP 4 Use three evenly spaced hinges to attach the swinging
bookcase to the stationary case on the right. This bookcase
should now cover the doorway completely and move backward
into the hidden room.

STEP 5 Use a piece of chalk to trace the arc of the door’s swing.
Figure how much the door’s movement will interfere with the shelf
that goes on the left side, and use a saw to cut away a section in
that case’s right and back side so that the door will swing freely,
cutting all the way from the top to the bottom.

STEP 6 Line up the third bookcase on the wall next to the
swinging bookcase and test it. If you need more clearance,
continue to sand or saw down the back right corner.

STEP 7 Once the swing is perfect, bolt the third bookcase to the
ceiling or a wall stud.

STEP 8 Glue a piece of matching wood trim to the front of each
stationary case.

STEP 9 Glue two thin magnets to the center case’s top and
bottom left corners, and one more at its center.

STEP 10 On the left case, glue three thin magnets to the top,
bottom, and center of the case's front left edge, lining them up with
the magnets on the center case. This will allow the door to catch
securely as it closes.

STEP 11 Secretly hang out in your hidden lounge.
085 MAKE INVISIBLE SPEAKERS
Sacrifice a few old books for a camouflaged
sound source.

MATERIALS
Six hardcover books
Two desktop speakers
Pencil
Jigsaw
Clamps
Pin
Hot-glue gun
Drill
Media player

STEP 1 Trace the profile of a speaker onto the cover of one book,
then draw a square around it with ½ inch (1.25 cm) on all sides.

STEP 2 Drill a hole in the cover and then use a jigsaw to cut out
this shape, piercing all the way through the book.

STEP 3 Trace the hole onto a second book’s front cover, and onto
a third book’s back cover.

STEP 4 Cut this shape out of both books, cutting all the way to the
unmarked cover without cutting through it.
STEP 5 On each book, fold the covers back and clamp them
together. Use the jigsaw to cut away the page bits that are closest
to the spine. (These will block sound.)

STEP 6 Drill holes into the spines’ outsides.

STEP 7 Attach the speaker to the inside of the central book with
hot glue, avoiding sensitive parts like the front. Then glue the three
books together at their sides and clamp together; let dry.

STEP 8 Cover the edges of the inside cavity with glue.

STEP 9 Drill a hole into the back of the central book and run the
speaker wire out to a media player. Repeat with the other three
books, then hide your book speakers amid your favorite tomes.
086 MONITOR YOUR HOME WITH A LASER
SECURITY SYSTEM




Everybody loves a good laser show . . . except
maybe the thief caught in one.

MATERIALS
Two project boxes
Drill
Photocell
12-volt siren
5k-ohm variable resistor
2N3904 transistor
100uF capacitor
9-volt battery
Electrical wire
Wire strippers
Soldering iron and solder
Velcro
5-milliwatt red laser
Switch
Hot-glue gun
3.2-volt AC adapter
Small mirrors, if needed
Mounting putty, if needed

STEP 1 Drill two holes in the first project box: one for the siren,
and one for the photocell. This will be the receiver.

STEP 2 Follow the circuitry diagram at near right, soldering
together the components with electrical wire.
STEP 3 Install the assembled components inside the receiver
project box. Mount the photocell and the siren on the box’s sides
and connect it to the interior wiring.

STEP 4 Drill two holes in the second project box: one for the
switch, and one for the laser. Mount the laser and switch inside
this box with hot glue.

STEP 5 Cut off and strip the ends of the AC adapter wires and run
them into the box. Use electrical wire to connect them to the laser
and switch, following the circuitry diagram at far right. Then close
the box and test the laser.

STEP 6 Line up the laser box with the receiver box. Use the
variable resistor to adjust the photocell’s sensitivity so it can detect
motion during daylight hours. When correctly tuned, the receiver
box will not make sound when the laser is shining on it.

STEP 7 Attach Velcro to both project boxes. Mount the laser on
the wall at about waist height beside the door you want protected.
Plug in the AC adapter.

STEP 8 If you want to protect multiple doors and windows, use
mounting putty to attach tiny mirrors to the wall at angles that
bounce the laser’s beam around the room. You may have to play
with the mirrors’ positions to get it right.

STEP 9 Once you’re done with the mirrors, mount the receiver box
so that the photocell lines up directly with the end of the laser
beam. When the beam is broken, the alarm will sound.
087 SNOOPER-PROOF YOUR WALLET
Foil RFID thieves with—well, aluminum foil,
believe it or not.

MATERIALS
Wallet
Aluminum foil

Lurking inside your wallet’s credit cards are radio-frequency
identification chips (RFIDs), and lurking outside your wallet are
goons who scan that info and make off with your identity.

STEP 1 Tear off a piece of aluminum foil about 6 inches (15 cm) in
length.

STEP 2 Fold the aluminum foil to the size of a dollar bill.

STEP 3 Tuck the folded aluminum foil into your wallet’s billfold,
place your cards inside, and forget about those RFID scammers
out there.
088 INSTALL AN ELECTRICAL-OUTLET WALL
SAFE




Keep small valuables in a place no one would
ever look—and hope burglars don’t try to plug
anything in.

MATERIALS
Cut-in box
Pencil
Drywall saw
Residential-grade volt receptacle
Roofing nails and washers
Faceplate
Screw
Screwdriver

STEP 1 Place the cut-in box on the wall where you want your safe
and trace around it with a pencil. Cut the hole with a drywall saw.

STEP 2 Slide the cut-in box into the hole. Fill it up with small
valuables.

STEP 3 The volt receptacle has two holes, one at its top and one
at its bottom. Slide the roofing nails through the washers and then
through these holes.

STEP 4 Attach the volt receptacle to the cut-in box by sliding the
nails into the box’s top and bottom holes.

STEP 5 Screw the faceplate onto the receptacle.




089 CARRY A FILM-ROLL KEYCHAIN
STEP 1 Drill a small hole into the spool hub of a 35mm film roll.

STEP 2 Insert a key- ring loop through the roll’s hole.
STEP 3 Thread your keys onto the loop and carry them like an
old-school film nut.




090 MAKE A MUSICAL STASH FOR YOUR
CASH
Annoy would-be thieves with a safe booby-
trapped with bad music.

MATERIALS
Musical greeting card
Craft knife
Double-sided tape
Box

STEP 1 Remove the noisemaker from a musical greeting card by
opening the card and tearing off the paper over the noisemaker.
Then cut out the speaker and circuit.

STEP 2 The speaker has a paper tab that, when unfolded, plays
music. Use double-sided tape to adhere this tab so it straddles
your box’s hinge, and affix the speaker and circuit inside the box.
When the box is opened and the paper tab is unfolded, it will
sound the alarm.

STEP 3 Fill your box with treasure and listen for thieves.




091 TURN YOUR HDTV INTO A MAGIC WINDOW




Tired of looking at the yard? Connect your TV
to your laptop and gaze into space or deep sea
instead.

MATERIALS
Flatscreen TV with HDMI, DVI, VGA, or S-video port
Laptop with compatible port
Compatible cable
Converter box, if needed
Slideshow of your coolest photos

STEP 1 Assess your gear. Most flatscreens and laptops come with
ports that allow you to hook the two devices together. The trick is
making sure that both have the same connection type (HDMI, DVI,
VGA, or S-video). If they don’t, you’ll need to purchase a small
converter box.

STEP 2 Connect the laptop and the flatscreen with a compatible
cable. Your computer screen should immediately appear on your
TV. If it doesn’t, go to the TV and cycle through the input devices
until what’s on your computer screen shows up.

STEP 3 Create a slideshow on your laptop and press play. Your
backyard has never looked so good.

092 CRAFT A DIY DIGITAL PHOTO FRAME
Turn an old laptop into a digital frame that
automatically displays new shots.

MATERIALS
Used laptop
Flickr account
USB adapter or PMCIA wireless card, if needed
Screwdriver
Custom frame and mat
Mounting board
Pin
Tape
Hot-glue gun

STEP 1 Before disassembling the laptop, download the Slickr
screensaver from popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks and enter your
Flickr account information.

STEP 2 Make sure the laptop is Wi-Fi enabled. If it’s not, get a
USB adapter or a PCMCIA wireless card (find either online or in
tech retail stores).

STEP 3 Take apart enough of the laptop to get at the ribbon cable
that connects the LCD (usually found under the keyboard), and
carefully unplug it. Be careful when removing the plastic border
from the screen—there are several thin cables, and if you rip one,
the LCD is useless.
STEP 4 Measure the bare screen and order your frame, making
sure it’s deep enough to provide 1 inch (2.5 cm) of room behind
the LCD so it can breathe. Skip the glass.

STEP 5 Cut two self-adhesive mounting boards—one to
strengthen the frame’s mat and one on which to mount the laptop
bottom. Poke ventilation holes in the board that will go between
the LCD and the laptop bottom.

STEP 6 Assemble the pieces in a sandwich—frame, mat,
mounting board, LCD, mounting board, and laptop bottom—using
tape. Hot-glue it all together.

STEP 7 Reattach the LCD cable to the laptop and reassemble the
keyboard. Attach the second piece of board at an angle to the
back of the frame as a stand.

STEP 8 Give it to Mom. Start it up. Add shots to your Flickr
account for Mom to see.
093 GIVE AN OLD TV A RERUN




Resurrect an old TV as a monitor for an iPhone
or an external display for a PC.

MATERIALS
Audio/video transmitter kit
Soldering iron and solder
Twin-lead cable
Wire strippers
Old television
A/V RCA cables
Media player
Converter cable, if needed
12-volt battery supply

STEP 1 Assemble the A/V transmitter kit you’ve purchased
according to the instructions and circuitry diagram. This’ll take
some time—and some soldering.

STEP 2 Cut a length of the twin-lead cable and strip both ends of
it. Solder one end to the antenna connector’s pins on the
underside of the transmitter kit’s circuit board. Route the cable
through the large hole in the kit’s lid, and connect it to the TV’s
antenna screw terminals.
STEP 3 Attach the A/V RCA cables to your media player, and
connect the other ends to the video- and audio-signal inputs on
the transmitter kit. (For an iPod or iPhone, plug a converter cable
into the dock connector and run the converter’s video jack and one
of the audio jacks into the kit’s inputs.)

STEP 4 Connect the transmitter to a 12-volt battery, turn on your
media player, and tune your television to UHF channel 21.

STEP 5 If necessary, tweak the picture and sound quality by
adjusting the screws in the top of the A/V transmitter kit’s case.

STEP 6 Choose a video from your media player’s library, hit play,
and enjoy your “relic’s” new use.




     WARNING
     The transmitter kit is designed to work wirelessly, but such
     use violates regulations, so we saved you the trouble.
     Plus, this solution is less likely to cause harmful
     interference.
094 HACK THE PERFECT GAMING CHAIR
Turn your old favorite recliner into your new
favorite gaming chair.

MATERIALS
Old recliner
Plywood
Jigsaw
Sandpaper
Varnish
Heavy-duty swing-arm bracket
LCD monitor
Heavy-duty L-shaped bracket
Brackets with bolts and screws
Two speakers
Velcro, if needed
Superglue
Mousepad
Lightweight aluminum sheeting
Box cutter
Four magnets

STEP 1 Use a jigsaw to cut a piece of plywood the width of your
recliner’s arms to serve as a desktop.

STEP 2 Saw a U-shaped contour into the edge of the desktop that
will face you, then sand and varnish it.

STEP 3 Attach the swing-arm bracket to one arm of your recliner
using bolts or screws. (If necessary, remove the chair’s stuffing or
upholstery to find a panel or frame to which you can attach the
hardware.) Secure the other end of the arm bracket to the
desktop.

STEP 4 Attach the L-shaped bracket to the plywood desktop and
mount your LCD monitor to it with screws.

STEP 5 Secure two speakers to the back of the chair using
brackets and the appropriate screws or bolts. Again, dig through
stuffing or upholstery to find a sturdy spot for mounting if
necessary. For small, lightweight speakers, you could try adhesive
Velcro.

STEP 6 Glue the mousepad to one side of the desktop.

STEP 7 With a box cutter, cut aluminum sheeting to the size of
your keyboard and glue it to the plywood.

STEP 8 Glue magnets to each corner of your keyboard’s
underside to hold the keyboard to the aluminum.

STEP 9 Hook your speakers, monitor, mouse, and keyboard into
your computer console and get gaming.
A WEARABLE LED TELEVISION
Electrical engineer David Forbes stunned everyone in the Detroit
Metro Airport when he debuted his wearable TV—and, no wonder,
with 160 circuit boards and enough electronics to start a data
center strapped to his body. The vest features a sharp 160-by-
120-pixel LED display, and it plays video signal from his iPod, all
off battery packs he carries in his pockets. The charge lasts 90
minutes—just enough for three episodes of The Simpsons.
095 MAKE A TV OSCILLOSCOPE
STEP 1 Turn off and unplug a black-and-white TV.

STEP 2 Remove the TV’s back and find the deflector coil
assembly (the large coils looped around the glass tube). There are
two pairs of wires on either side of the coil. Follow them to the
TV’s circuit board and desolder one, then plug the TV back in and
turn it on. If the screen shows a horizontal line, you’ve cut a wire
that enables the vertical coil. If the line is vertical, you’ve cut a wire
that enables the horizontal coil. Keep this in mind.

STEP 3 Turn off and unplug the TV. Desolder the coil’s remaining
three wires, then resolder them so that the two that once plugged
into the horizontal coil’s input on the circuit board now go to the
vertical coil’s input.
STEP 4 Peel back an audio cord’s end and strip its wires. Twist
them with the wires that went to the vertical coil.

STEP 5 Replace the TV’s back and plug the audio cord into a
media player. Watch your music take shape.




096 HACK A TV CONSOLE INTO A SEAT
STEP 1 Make sure the TV is off and unplugged, then open up the
console’s backing. Gingerly remove the electronics, speakers, and
television tube inside the TV. Be especially careful with the tube,
which could break.

STEP 2 On the front of the console, locate the edges of the TV
screen. Draw a line on both sides extending up over the lip and
onto the console’s top.

STEP 3 Using a jigsaw, cut down along the guides on the
console’s top until you reach the TV screen’s frame. Remove this
part of the console’s top.

STEP 4 Gently remove the screen and its frame.

STEP 5 Return the console’s backing; secure with nails.

STEP 6 Measure and cut two plywood pieces to cover the sides of
the cavity. Stain or paint them so they match the rest of the
console and nail them in place.

STEP 7 Measure and cut two pieces of foam to serve as bottom
and back cushions for the seat. Cover them with material of your
choosing. Glue them down inside the console.

STEP 8 Take a seat. You’ve earned it.




097 INSTALL AN AQUARIUM IN AN OLD TV
STEP 1 Unplug the television, remove its back, and carefully pull
out the electronics and television tube. Be especially careful with
the tube, which is fragile.
STEP 2 Measure the height, depth, and width of the hole in the
back of the TV. It should fit your run-of-the-mill 20-gallon (75-l)
aquarium, hopefully with a little space left over for the filter, pump,
heater, and power strip.

STEP 3 Place supports to hold the aquarium’s weight and boost it
up so it lines up behind the TV’s screen. Leave space above it for
a lightbulb.

STEP 4 Use a circular saw to cut off the console’s top, then
transform it into a lid with two hinges and a handle.

STEP 5 Mount a fluorescent bulb to the underside of the lid with
small wood screws.

STEP 6 Place the tank inside the console, along with the power
strip, filter, heater, and pump. Run the power strip's wire out of the
lid and replace the console’s back.

STEP 7 Fill the aquarium slowly. Add fish and accessories.

STEP 8 Plug all the components into the power strip, plug the
power strip into the wall, and watch your fishies swim on the big
screen.
098 BUILD A BOOB-TUBE BAR
STEP 1 Unplug the television and open up the console’s backing.
Using caution, take out the electronics, speakers, and glass tube
inside the TV, and remove the screen.

STEP 2 Strip out any supports you won’t be using on the inside,
including unnecessary screws and nails. Sand the interior to
remove splinters and old glue globs.

STEP 3 You need two shelves: one for booze that displays behind
the TV screen’s hole, and one for wine, which should be stored
where the speakers used to be. If possible, reserve any plywood
bases to use as shelves, or make new ones to fit inside your
console and glue them in with wood glue.

STEP 4 Remove the existing grating and grill cloth that cover the
speakers. Replace the grill cloth and remount the grating with
hinges that allows easy access to the wine.
STEP 5 If you like, sand and paint or stain the outside.

STEP 6 Cut and insert two mirrors: one to fit over the shelf and
one to fit on the back wall behind the window. Replace the
console's backing.

STEP 7 Stock the bar with your preferred liquor and wine, and
host a swanky party.




099 SET UP A DIY DRIVE-IN




Can’t find an outdoor movie theater? Set up
your own in your backyard.

Seeing a movie outdoors used to be pretty simple. Drive a bit, pay
at the entrance gate, find a parking space, and wait for the
towering images to flicker into view. But finding a drive-in isn’t easy
these days. What to do if you yearn to experience the cinema
outside? Create it yourself. Here’s how to put together a cheap,
portable screening for a group of friends.

MATERIALS
White wall or sheet Four grommets
Two tent stakes and twine Battery-powered projector
Media player
Car cigarette lighter adapter FM receiver
STEP 1 Use a white wall or a bedsheet as your backdrop. If using
a sheet, put a grommet in each corner and secure the top
grommets to trees or posts and the bottom grommets to the tent
stakes using twine.

STEP 2 Hook a battery-powered, presentation-style projector up to
your media player (a computer or an iPad).

STEP 3 Plug the projector into your car’s cigarette lighter via an
adapter to keep it juiced during the feature film.

STEP 4 Connect your media player’s audio to an FM receiver. Set
the receiver to the frequency of your choice.

STEP 5 Have your friends park within the specified range of the
receiver and set their car radios to the same frequency as the
receiver.

STEP 6 Hit play on your media player and be sure to pass the
popcorn.




     WARNING
     Before starting this project, visit transition.fcc.gov/lpfm.
     This page details the FCC’s regulations for low-power
     stations. Don’t charge for attendance if you’re showing a
     DVD, and get all proper permits if your DIY drive-in will be
     in a public place.
THE GRAFFITI LASER

Australian artist Chris Poole was driving around his native Perth
when some curbside garbage caught his eye. Unlike the average
scavenger, Poole wasn’t searching for futons: He had his eye on
an old slide viewer—a key component for his next project, a laser-
based projector that could display photos (albeit with a green hue)
to the entire town.

Thanks to his penchant for collecting, Poole already had the basic
materials. To start, he rewired a tiny green laser—the kind used in
a pointer—so it could work with a long-running battery pack he
had lying around, which he had pulled out of an electric bicycle.
Next he nailed an electronics-mounting frame to a wooden board 3
feet (1 m) in length and set the laser at one end, aimed down the
frame. He snapped in a lens from a used disposable camera at the
other end and set a makeshift slide holder and the scrapped slide
viewer’s lens in between. The viewer enlarges the beam so it
covers the slide, allowing him to project an 8-by-10-foot (2.5-by-3-
m) image of former PopSci editor-in-chief Mark Jannot from 100
feet (30 m) away.




100 HANG A LIQUID LAMP
For cool mood lighting, combine off-the-shelf
parts—and just add mineral oil.

Forget the lava lamp: This modern light source trades in the
hippie-dippie vibe for an edgier, more industrial look. And you can
make it yourself by filling a glass globe with mineral oil and
hooking it up to an air pump for a bubbly effect.

MATERIALS
Clear ¼-inch (6.35-mm) PVC tubing
Craft knife
3-wire 18-awg SJOOW cord
Zip ties
3-prong male plug
Vapor-tight fixture with a ½-inch (1.25-cm) bulb
Nylon liquid-tight strain relief with flex fitting and threads that match the fixture
Wire strippers
Two 18-awg wire nuts
Rotary tool
Colored, clear 25-watt bulb
Mineral oil
Basic air pump

STEP 1 Measure and cut your clear tubing and electrical cord so
that it will reach the power supply from your lamp. Tether them
together with zip ties, then wire the male plug to the cord’s end.

STEP 2 Remove the vapor-tight fixture’s base from the cap.

STEP 3 Screw the strain relief into the threaded opening at the top
of the vapor-tight fixture’s cap.

STEP 4 Run the air tube and the electrical cord through the strain
relief and into the cap. Strip the ends of the electrical cord and
connect them to the vapor-tight fixture’s leads with the wire nuts.
STEP 5 Use a rotary tool to drill a hole in the bottom of the vapor-
tight fixture’s base. Feed the clear tube through this hole, leaving
about 8 inches (20 cm) below the base.

STEP 6 Screw the base back to the cap. As you do so, ground the
fixture by twisting the green ground lead around one of the screws
that connects the cap to the base.

STEP 7 Gently tighten the strain relief via its nut—don’t overdo it,
or you’ll constrict the tubing.

STEP 8 Screw the clear, colored bulb into the socket.

STEP 9 Fill the glass globe about one-third full of mineral oil and
screw the bulb to the base. Add the vapor-tight fixture’s aluminum
grill.

STEP 10 Hang your lamp, attach the air tube to the pump, plug in
the pump and the light, and presto: bubble light!
101 MOLD A RETRO LAMP BASE
Use one of those ubiquitous plastic bottles as a
mold for a neat lamp base.

MATERIALS
Empty plastic water bottle with a relatively flat top
Craft knife
Drill
Petroleum jelly
Hacksaw
Hollow threaded rod
Hot-glue gun
Empty pill bottle
Plaster
Fine-grit sandpaper
Flat washer, lock washer, and nut
Lamp rewiring kit
Lampshade

STEP 1 Using a craft knife, cut off the bottom of the plastic bottle.
Leave a slight rim so the mold has a rounded edge.

STEP 2 Drill a ½-inch (1.25-cm) hole into the center of the water
bottle’s cap.

STEP 3 Coat the inside of the water bottle and its cap with a thin,
even film of petroleum jelly.

STEP 4 Use a hacksaw to cut a ½-inch (1.25-cm), hollow,
threaded rod to the height of your water bottle, minus about ¼ inch
(6.35 mm).

STEP 5 With the cap screwed onto the bottle, thread the rod from
the bottom so that ¼ inch (6.35 mm) sticks out of the cap. Use a
hot-glue gun to seal the area on the outside of the bottle where the
threads meet the cap’s top.

STEP 6 Find a pill bottle that’s 75 percent smaller than your plastic
bottle. Remove its lid and drill a ½-inch (1.25-cm) hole into the
center of its bottom.

STEP 7 Coat the medicine bottle’s bottom and halfway up its sides
with petroleum jelly.

STEP 8 Holding both bottles with their bottoms facing each other,
screw the medicine bottle onto the rod so it fits inside the larger
plastic bottle, a bit past flush. (This creates a slight recess in the
bottom of your lamp base.)

STEP 9 Place the entire apparatus upside down into a small glass
so that the water bottle’s cap points down inside the glass.

STEP 10 Mix then pour your plaster into the larger plastic bottle
until it fills up to the rim of the larger bottle’s bottom. Let set for a
half hour or until the plaster sets.

STEP 11 Unscrew the bottle cap and the medicine bottle from the
hollow threaded rod. Carefully peel the plastic bottle off the mold
with a craft knife.

STEP 12 Once you’ve removed the bottle, sand the bottom flat
and clean up any other rough surface areas.

STEP 13 Attach a flat washer, lock washer, and nut to the rod at
the base of the lamp. Don’t overtighten.

STEP 14 Drill a ¼-inch (6.35-mm) hole through the side of the
base into the slight recess in the lamp’s bottom. Thread the lamp
cord through the hole and into the rod.

STEP 15 Wire the socket and attach it to the rod at the top of the
lamp base. Top it off with your shade of choice.
102 CREATE A MESMERIZING PERSISTENCE-
OF-VISION CLOCK




This clock uses optic trickery to make a moving
display look like a static image.

In typical POV projects, your eye briefly continues to see an image
after it disappears. But instead of showing one message, this
model tells the time with a continuously updated rotating display.
Neat.

MATERIALS
Scrap wooden boards
Nails
Hammer
POV kit with LEDs in a color of your choosing
Soldering iron and solder
Two-pin right-angle connector
DC motor
Electrical wire
9-volt battery
10k-ohm potentiometer
100k-ohm resistor
470k-ohm resistor
10k-ohm resistor
10uF capacitor
LN914 diode
555 timer IC
Metal-oxide–semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET)
Drill
On/off switch
STEP 1 Build the clock’s backboard out of scrap wood (or
whatever materials you have on hand).

STEP 2 Assemble the POV kit according to its instructions, then
program its microcontroller with the software at
popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks. (The software is preprogrammed
to start at 12:00, but you can set it before programming the
microcontroller.) Solder the two-pin right-angle connector to the
POV kit’s battery terminals.

STEP 3 Build the motor-speed controller using the circuitry
diagram at right. Drill a hole slightly smaller than the motor’s
spindle in the clock, then mount the motor and controller to the
clock’s back. Tap the wood over the spindle so it sticks through the
hole.

STEP 4 Mount another piece of scrap wood over the motor’s
spindle to act as a rotating arm. It should be large enough to
accommodate your POV kit and battery pack.

STEP 5 Attach the POV kit and battery pack to the rotating arm so
that their weight is evenly distributed.

STEP 6 Solder wires to the two-pin right-angle connector and then
solder them to the battery pack’s 9-volt battery snap. Turn on the
motor’s power supply, and adjust the motor-speed controller by
turning the potentiometer knob until the POV display is readable.
103 TELL TIME WITH A DART CLOCK
Bring the bar home with this dead-simple DIY
timepiece.

MATERIALS
Dartboard
Battery-powered clock
Pencil
Drill
12 darts
Battery

STEP 1 Place the dartboard facedown and put the clock
mechanism at its center. Trace the outline of the mechanism.
STEP 2 Mark the outline’s center and double-check that it’s the
bull’s eye. Drill a hole large enough to fit the chad that holds the
clock’s hands in place. Attach the clock to the board’s back.

STEP 3 Push four darts into the board to represent the numbers
12, 3, 6, and 9.

STEP 4 Divide the area between each pair of darts into thirds.
Mark these divisions, then place a dart at each mark.

STEP 5 Assemble the hands on the dartboard’s front and screw
on the chad that secures them.

STEP 6 Turn the board over, pop the battery into the clock, and
set the hour and minute hands. Just don’t confuse the time for the
score.
104 Make a Modern Mag Rack
Magazines sure can pile up. House ‘em in this
fiberglass rack.

MATERIALS
1-by-2-foot (30-by-60-cm) polystyrene sheet
Ruler
Grease pencil
Box cutter
¾-inch (1.9-cm) thick wood
Jigsaw
Saw blade
Drill
Two wood dowels that are 9 inches (23 cm) in length
Wood glue
Six screws

STEP 1 With a ruler and a grease pencil, draw the pattern at left
onto the polystyrene.
STEP 2 Wearing a dust mask, use a rotary tool with a cut-off
wheel to cut out all the ½-inch (1.25-cm) sections.

STEP 3 Use a jigsaw to cut the wood into two strips that are 2 ½
inches (6.35 cm) high and 1 foot (30 cm) long.

STEP 4 Create a groove ¾ inch (1.9 cm) deep in the top of the
wood pieces with a saw blade.

STEP 5 Drill two indentations into the inside of each of the wood
pieces. Slide the dowels into the holes so that they connect the
wood pieces. Secure with wood glue.

STEP 6 Slide the polystyrene into one of the wood pieces’
grooves. Secure it with three evenly spaced screws along one of
the wood pieces.

STEP 7 Fold the polystyrene into a U shape and slide it into the
second wood piece’s groove. Secure with screws again.
105 SEW AN EASY EBOOK READER CASE




Protect your slick tablet with a felt case tucked
inside an oversize book.

MATERIALS
Tablet
Book 1 inch (2.5 cm) larger than your tablet on all sides
Box cutter
Felt
Scissors
Ruler
Hot-glue gun
Cardboard
Pencil
3 feet (90 cm) of ½-inch (1.25-cm) braided elastic

STEP 1 Using a box cutter, cut out the pages from the book. Glue
a strip of felt to the inside of its spine.

STEP 2 Cut two pieces of cardboard to the size of the book’s
covers. Snip off the cardboard’s corners.

STEP 3 Measure and cut two pieces of felt so they’re 2 inches (5
cm) larger than the cardboard on all sides. Cut 45-degree-angle
slits into the felt pieces’ corners.

STEP 4 Position one of the cardboard pieces in the center of a felt
piece. Fold the felt over the cardboard’s corners and hot-glue it in
place. Repeat with the other pieces.
STEP 5 Trace the tablet’s outline on the back of one cardboard
piece. On both sides of each of the outline’s corners, use scissors
to punch two holes large enough to fit your elastic. Each hole
should be 1 inch (2.5 cm) from the outline’s corner.

STEP 6 Cut four 4-inch (10-cm) pieces of braided elastic. Feed
one from the back of the cardboard up through one of the holes
and then back through the facing hole. Repeat with the other three
strips and insert your tablet so that the strips go over the device’s
corners, holding it in place. If it fits, hot-glue the elastic pieces’
ends to the cardboard.

STEP 7 Use scissors to cut two holes into the book’s back cover
near its outside edge. Thread the remaining elastic through one
hole from the outside. Measure how long the elastic needs to be to
encircle the book when it’s closed with the tablet and cardboard
tucked inside, then cut the elastic and glue its ends to the inside
back cover.

STEP 8 Line up the felt-wrapped cardboard pieces with the book
covers and hot-glue them together (the felt should be facing you,
on the inside of the book).

STEP 9 Let the glue dry, slide the tablet under the elastic, and
revel in being secretly high tech.




106 TURN A PRINTER INTO A HIGH-VOLUME
DOCUMENT SHREDDER
Got mail? Shred it and other sensitive
documents with this hacked printer.

MATERIALS
Laser printer that prints 25 pages per minute
Screwdriver
Small Perfboard panel
Two LM3903 integrated circuits
Two 100uF, 6-volt electrolytic capacitors
Electrical wire
Wire strippers
Soldering iron and solder
6-volt, 60-mA DC motor
Drill
Glue
5-volt DC-power supply
Cheap, lightweight paper shredder (the kind that fits over a wastebasket)

STEP 1 Unplug and turn off your printer, then use a screwdriver to
remove its rear-access panel. Take out the fuser, which bonds
toner to paper and is a fire hazard.

STEP 2 Remove the printer’s top and side panels and gut it: Take
out any power supplies, computer processing units, motors, fans,
laser units, toner cartridges, and related circuit boards and wiring.
Leave in any solenoids (the long wire loops that control the printer
trays) and the toner cartridge, which will control the drive for the
trays. Reattach the top and side panels.

STEP 3 To make the controller, mount the two LM3903 integrated
circuits onto Perfboard. Attach each capacitor to one integrated
circuit, soldering the capacitors’ positive leads to the integrated
circuits’ 2 pins, and their negative ones to the 1 pins.
STEP 4 Mount the controller in the case, then solder each of the
printer’s original solenoids to one of the two integrated circuits:
The solenoids’ negative leads go to the 8 pins, and their positive
leads should go to the 6 pins.

STEP 5 Replace the printer’s original motor with the 6-volt, 60-mA
DC motor. Mount it inside the printer with the original motor’s
screws.

STEP 6 Take the 5-volt DC-power supply and glue it inside the
case on a side panel near the original power supply’s location.
Then strip its output cord and connect its positive and negative
wires with the positive and negative wires of the power leads on
the DC motor and the shredder. (The shredder’s wires should run
through the back of the printer at this point.)

STEP 7 Attach wires to the 5-volt DC-power supply’s positive and
negative leads, then connect them to the integrated circuits: The
positive leads go to the 5 pin and the negative leads go to the 4
pin. Secure all the positive and negative connections with wire
nuts.

STEP 8 Replace the side panel to cover the motor. (Cut a hole for
clearance if parts stick out, but cover those later with panels to
avoid injury.) Drill holes in the printer case’s back, then secure the
shredder to it with screws.

STEP 9 Load your trays with shreddables, and start making
confetti out of your private information.




     WARNING
    Listen up: This project isn’t for first-time tinkerers. If done
    incorrectly, it could result in fire, shock, or other nasty
    situations. Only attempt this project if you really know what
    you’re doing, and even then, exercise extreme caution.




107 SORT MAIL WITH OLD CDS
STEP 1 Wearing safety goggles, use a blowtorch to bend a CD at
a 90-degree angle about ¾ inch (1.9 cm) from the edge.

STEP 2 Repeat on two other CDs, this time bending the discs 1 ¾
inches (4.5 cm) away from the edge.

STEP 3 Glue the bent portions of the CDs to a base made of an
un-molested CD. Glue the tallest CD in between the two bent
ones.

STEP 4 Use the two sections to sort your mail into important and
not-so-important stacks.
108 IMPROVISE A POSTAGE SCALE
This magnetic device says just how many
stamps go on that envelope.

MATERIALS
Dowel Handsaw
Improvised dowel base
Six small ring magnets
Two pieces of card stock
Straw
Scissors
Glue
Three objects with an array of masses
STEP 1 Use a handsaw to cut the dowel down to 6 inches (15
cm). Insert it into an object that works as a base. Slip the magnets
over it with like poles facing each other.

STEP 2 Cut two card stock pieces. Make a hole in one that will fit
your straw. Cut four slits into the straw’s end, slide the straw
through the hole, and fold the flaps back.

STEP 3 Glue the second card stock piece directly on top of the
cardboard and straw. Slide the straw over the dowel.

STEP 4 Find objects measuring ½ ounce (15 g), 1 ounce (28 g),
and 2 ounces (56 g). Put each on the card stock and mark where
the straw hits the dowel.

STEP 5 Place a letter on the scale. Once you know its weight, you
can determine its postage.
109 TURN YOUR ROOMBA INTO A SENTRY




Why? To patrol your home while you’re away,
capturing pics you can access from any mobile
device.

The Roomba vacuum is an incredibly sophisticated robot,
especially for a gadget that costs less than $300. It scoots along at
1 foot (30 cm) per second, while its sensors detect and navigate
obstacles. Here we’ve outfitted one with a webcam so you can
keep tabs on your pad from afar.

MATERIALS
Wireless webcam
Video-streaming site account or dedicated website for video
Roomba
Strong Velcro
iPad or tablet, if needed
Mobile device for monitoring from afar

STEP 1 Get a wireless webcam that comes with its own free
website for real-time broadcasting. If you want to use a wireless
webcam you already own, set up an account for it on a video-
streaming site.
STEP 2 Follow the camera’s instructions to configure video
capture and have it sent either to the website or to the streaming-
video site.

STEP 3 Attach the webcam to your Roomba with Velcro, send it
on its way, and head out the door. Any time that you want to check
in on your ’bot’s findings, load the video feed on your smartphone
or a computer.

STEP 4 For extra deterrence, you can attach an iPad or a tablet
PC to the Roomba, navigate to the streaming-video page, and
display it on the screen. This way, would-be intruders will see what
you’re seeing in real time—and know they’d better put that Wii
system down and scram.

  IT GETS EVEN BETTER
  Any Roomba that’s rolled off the assembly line since October
  24, 2005, has a serial command interface (SCI), which is
  essentially an open platform for hackers to play with. This
  software allows your preprogrammed instructions to control
  your Roomba, making it an ideal ready-made base for any
  robotics project.
110 MAKE A ROBOTIC ARTISTE
Let your vacuum make a mess for a change—
one that’s worthy of any 22nd-century gallery.

MATERIALS
Large canvas
Items to use as bumpers
Brushes and rollers
Glue or Velcro
Paint trays
Paint

STEP 1 Lay a large canvas on your floor and—to keep your
Roomba from painting areas you’d prefer left undecorated—
arrange objects around the periphery to keep the Roomba within
bounds. Place your charging station within that boundary.
STEP 2 Attach brushes and rollers with glue or Velcro to the front,
back, and sides of the Roomba. For real drips, try repurposing an
old chandelier, or cobbling together a paintbrush holder using a
colander and kitchen utensils.

STEP 3 Set paint trays near the charging station so it can refuel
with color after it recharges.
111 REMOVE RUST WITH ELECTRICITY




Blast away resistant rust with a bucketful of
electrodes.

MATERIALS
5-gallon (19-l) plastic bucket
Five 18-inch (45-cm) sections of ½-inch (1.25-cm) non-stainless-steel rebar
Drill
5 feet (1.5 m) pliable rust- resistant wire
Pliers
5 feet (1.5 m) 12-awg insulated copper wire
Wire strippers
Five wire nuts
Box of washing soda
Water
Small board or other nonconductive object
One alligator clip
Nail
Hammer
Small battery charger
Wire brush extension mounted on a rotary tool
Antirust spray

STEP 1 Space the five rebar sections evenly inside the bucket.
Use a drill with a ¼-inch (6.35-mm) bit to make two small holes in
the bucket near each piece of rebar: one that’s 2 inches (5 cm)
down from the bucket’s rim, and the second about 4 inches (10
cm) down from that.

STEP 2 To secure the rebar, thread rust-resistant wire through
each hole, around the rebar, and back out again. Twist the wire
tight and snip off the excess with pliers.
STEP 3 Once all rebar is in place, cut five 1-foot (30-cm) sections
of copper wire and strip the ends.

STEP 4 On the outside of the bucket, connect rebar sections
together with a piece of copper wire and cover with a wire nut.
Leave the first and last rebar pieces unconnected, with the fifth
section of copper wire loose.

STEP 5 Add 5 tablespoons of washing soda to the bucket and fill
within 2 inches (5 cm) of the rim with clean water.

STEP 6 Secure a board (or any nonconductive object) across the
top of the bucket.

STEP 7 With the battery charger turned off, attach its positive end
to the rebar wire and nail its negative end to the nonconductive
board. Then attach several alligator clips to the negative end and
let them hang so that they almost touch or barely dip into the
water.

STEP 8 Clean a small piece of your rusty object; attach this point
to the alligator clips so that the object hangs inside the bucket. It
should not touch the rebar.

STEP 9 Set the battery charger to a low setting (such as 6-volt 1.5
amp) and turn it on.

STEP 10 Bubbles will form and rust will begin to flake off. Leave
your object in the water for anywhere from an hour to a couple of
days. Then remove it and use a wire brush (and antirust spray, if
necessary) to remove the remaining flaky rust.
    WARNING
    We’re serious about not using stainless-steel rebar for the
    electrodes. Stainless steel’s chrome will leak during the
    electrolysis and form nasty compounds in your electrolyte.




112 CLEAN WITH A TOY-CAR BROOM
STEP 1 Use a drill and two screws to attach a very small board to
the underside of a remote-controlled car.

STEP 2 Attach a disposable sweeper head to the board with a drill
and two more screws. Make sure that the sweeper lies flat.

STEP 3 Use your remote to drive the dust away.
113 RIG A SUPERPOWERED SCRUB BRUSH
When elbow grease just won’t cut it, add mighty
power-tool action.

MATERIALS
Scrubber brush Rotary tool Power saw with mini saw blade
Clamps Electrical tape

STEP 1 Cut a groove into the handle of a bathroom-style scrubber
brush with a rotary tool.

STEP 2 Insert the power saw’s mini saw blade into the groove and
secure it with clamps.

STEP 3 Wrap the brush handle with electrical tape so that the
clamps are secured in place.

STEP 4 Reattach the blade to the saw, turn it on, and polish your
boat or scrub your tub. Just don’t use it on your Benz.
114 TRACK YOUR FOOD’S FRESHNESS
STEP 1 Remove the band from a basic digital watch.

STEP 2 When you open a container of perishable food, set the
watch’s timer.

STEP 3 Glue the watch face to the food item.

STEP 4 See instantly how many days have passed—no sniffing
necessary.
115 MOD A CRUMB-COLLECTING CUTTING
BOARD
Catch crumbs before they hit the floor with this
cutting board mod.

MATERIALS
Router table
Cutting board
Sandpaper
Olive oil

STEP 1 Use a router table to cut ½-inch (1.25-cm) channels into
the board, ½ inch (1.25 cm) apart.

STEP 2 Sand the surface of the board, including the edges of and
inside the channels.

STEP 3 Wipe the board down with olive oil.
STEP 4 Cut bread, contain crumbs.




116 HARVEST FRIDGE MAGNETS FROM AN
OLD HARD DRIVE




Get over that dead hard drive and pry out the
superstrong magnets hiding in it.
MATERIALS
Computer with a dead hard drive
Torx screwdriver kit

STEP 1 Unplug your computer before you begin working.

STEP 2 Open up your case and locate the hard drive. There’ll be a
power cord attached to it; unplug that, and undo any screws
holding the hard drive in place. Pull the hard drive out of the case.

STEP 3 Using a star-shaped Torx screwdriver kit, start unscrewing
the many, many screws on the hard drive’s case and remove it.
You’ll probably need to remove a lot of stickers in the process, too.

STEP 4 Once you’re looking at the internal workings of the hard
drive, locate the actuator arm (it’s the part that protrudes over the
disc-like thing, which is called a platter). Behind it is the actuator
(aka, one of two big-deal rare-earth magnets that you’re after).
Unscrew its fasteners with a Torx screwdriver and pry it off.

STEP 5 Once you’ve got the first magnet off, you’ll see a second
one beneath it. Pry it out with a screwdriver, too, and use the
magnets to spruce up the old fridge.
117 DO STUFF WITH BOTTLE CAPS
Next time you pop open a cold beer or soda,
pocket its cap and put it to use.

 SOAP-SLIME KILLER
 Twist a bottle cap into the bottom of a bar of soap—it prevents
 sticky crud from building up on your sink or tub surface.

 FRIDGE MAGNET
 Glue a small circular magnet inside a bottle cap with the
 nonmagnetic side facing the cap’s back, then smack it on the
 fridge to hold up the number of that take-out joint you like so
 much.
TINY CANDLES
Place a wick in the cap’s bottom, then pour hot wax to fill.
You’ll be well prepped next time the lights go out.

PLAYING PIECES
If you’ve got two 12-packs of different brands of beer, you’re
more than on your way to a good Friday night: You’ve got a
full set of checkers pieces. Now all you need is a checkered
tablecloth and a friend to play (and help drink).

MUD-ROOM MAT
Nail caps with their labels facing downward in a grid design
onto a piece of wood. Place the mat in front of your door, and
never track mud through the house again.
118 AVOID BURNING YOUR MOUTH WITH A
SMART COASTER




Never burn your mouth on a hot drink again
with this ingenious coaster.

MATERIALS
LM324N (low-power operational amplifier)
Thermistor
Electrical tape
Empty metal shoe polish container
Rotary tool
Red LED Hobby foam
Soldering iron and solder
1k-ohm resistor
10k-ohm resistor
10k-ohm potentiometer
Electrical wire
Wire strippers
3.7-volt battery
Mug

STEP 1 Clip off the unnecessary legs from the operational
amplifier, keeping pins 1, 2, 3, 4, and 11.

STEP 2 Attach the thermistor to the inside of the metal container’s
lid with some electrical tape. Be sure to insulate both of the
thermistor leads with tape.

STEP 3 Drill a hole into the side of the metal container for holding
the red LED. Insulate the bottom of the container with some scrap
paper or hobby foam.

STEP 4 Follow the circuitry diagram to make the circuit.

STEP 5 Fit the components inside the metal container, connect
the 3.7-volt battery, and close the metal lid.

STEP 6 Check your LED light by putting your finger on the coaster
lid. If it lights up, you’re good to start calibrating it. If not, check
your wiring.

STEP 7 Place your cup of fresh brew on the smart coaster and
use the 10k-ohm potentiometer to adjust the thermistor’s
sensitivity. Turn the potentiometer until the LED glows and monitor
the temperature of your beverage.

STEP 8 When the cup’s temp has fallen to your desired drinking
level, turn the potentiometer until the LED goes out. Your smart
coaster is now calibrated for this mug. Remember, if you change
mugs, you will have to recalibrate. Bottoms up.
119 Put an Old Coffee Can to Good Use
Long after the caffeine rush has worn off,
coffee cans come in handy. Here’s some clever
stuff to do with your empties.
120 DINNER TO GO IN A NITROUS-INJECTED
DINING TABLE
The world’s speediest piece of furniture, caught
on film.

Why would a man spend a year and $7,000 constructing a dining-
room table that cruises at 130 miles per hour (210 km/h) and
shoots flames up into the air as it speeds away? Sheer
competitiveness, as it turns out. A record for the world’s fastest
furniture existed—92 miles per hour (148 km/h) on a sofa—and
Perry Watkins wanted to beat it.

Watkins, a sales director in Wingrave, England, chose a dining
table as his furniture type because he thought it would be easiest
to mount onto a small, fast car. He started by buying an old two-
seat Reliant Scimitar Sabre V8 convertible, ripping off the
fiberglass panels, stripping it down to the chassis, and installing an
off-the-shelf nitrous oxide injection system for added power.

The resulting vehicle, dubbed Fast Food, smoked the record,
clocking an average speed of 113.8 miles per hour (180 km/h). But
it was the trimmings that really wowed onlookers. Watkins bolted
dishware to the table, as well as a variety of authentic-looking
foods, including gravy made of fiberglass resin and tea kettles that
puff flames 10 feet (3 m) into the air. The helmeted diner is
actually a mannequin.

Watkins is the real man behind the wheel, with his head barely
visible underneath a plastic chicken on a platter. The chicken is
quasi-functional: Before kicking in, the nitrous system purges
excess air through a tube leading to the fake fowl. “A 6-foot [1.8-m]
plume of white smoke comes out of the chicken’s backside,”
Watkins says. He figures that’s probably a world record, too.




  RAISE THE ROOF
  Where’s Watkins? He’s in the driver’s seat below the table,
  with his head poking from under a plated chicken.
121 IMPROVISE A SOUS-VIDE COOKER




Join the sous-vide craze with this el cheapo
home-built model.

The trick to delicious, evenly cooked meat is keeping your water
bath at a precise temperature by using a thermocoupler
temperature sensor and a proportional-integral-derivative (PID)
controller. Once you master this, play with other setups—a pot of
water on an electric plate, an electric kettle, or a lightbulb in an
insulated chamber.

MATERIALS
Cheap slow cooker or rice cooker with an on/off switch
Water
Thermocoupler temperature sensor
PID controller with auto-tuning feature
Vacuum sealer or zip-top plastic bag and straw
Food

STEP 1 Fill your slow cooker with enough water to cover the food
you’ll be cooking.

STEP 2 Plug your slow cooker and thermocoupler into your PID
controller, and your PID into a power outlet. (If you’re feeling
ambitious, there are several online tutorials on making your own
PID from scratch. The model we use here will run you between
$35 and $70—far cheaper than the $1,000 lab-grade immersion
cooker on the market.)

STEP 3 Now it’s time to vacuum-pack your food. If you don’t have
a vacuum sealer, try freezing your marinated meat and putting it in
a sandwich bag, sticking the thermocoupler into your meat inside
the bag, and partially sealing it up. Then suck the remaining air out
with a straw and quickly seal it.

STEP 4 Set the desired temperature. The PID controller’s LED
display will show the thermocoupler’s reading. Use the buttons to
set how hot you need the cooker to get, based on the required
temperature for your meat.

STEP 5 Place your meat in the slow cooker. Cook until the
thermocoupler reading indicates that your meat has reached the
desired temperature.

122 BUILD A DIY SMOKER
This clay-pot cooking device gives food a
wood-smoked taste.

MATERIALS
Hot plate Large unglazed clay pot with base
Drill with masonry bit
Grill thermometer
Stainless steel saucepan without handle
Wood chips
Circular grill grate

STEP 1 Place the pot on blocks, then situate the hot plate inside
the pot. Run the hot plate’s wire through the drainage hole in the
pot’s bottom.
STEP 2 Attach a masonry bit to a drill and make a hole in the pot’s
base large enough to fit a grill thermometer.

STEP 3 Place a stainless-steel saucepan on top of the hot plate.
(If you have one with a handle, remove it.)

STEP 4 Place wood chips in the pan, and a circular grill grate in
the pot above the pan.

STEP 5 Throw some ribs on the grill grate and put the pot’s base
on the pot as a cover. Then place the pot in an open area, plug in
your hot plate, and start cooking.




123 SET UP AN UMBRELLA SOLAR COOKER
What to do with an umbrella on a sunny day?
Fry eggs on it!

MATERIALS
Umbrella with ribs
Hacksaw
Plastic or acrylic mirror sheets, mirror film, or heavy-duty aluminum foil
Newspaper
Pencil
Tape or glue
Soldering iron and solder
Metal plant stand
Small barbecue grill rack
Nonstick aluminum pot or frying pan

STEP 1 Cut the shaft off an umbrella with a hacksaw. Check that
its ribs are in good shape, as they’ll be supporting the reflective
material that cooks your food.

STEP 2 Choose your reflective material, either mirror sheets
(which are more durable but more costly and difficult to find) or
aluminum foil, which will need to be replaced once you close the
umbrella.

STEP 3 Using a piece of newspaper, create a template by tracing
one of the triangular areas between the umbrella’s ribs. Use this to
cut enough reflective triangles to cover all of the umbrella’s inside
canvas.

STEP 4 Attach the reflective material to the umbrella with tape (or
glue, if working with mirror sheets).

STEP 5 Solder the grill rack to a plant stand.

STEP 6 Place the umbrella on the ground in the sun and set the
plant stand in the center.

STEP 7 Place an aluminum pot on the grill stand and watch the
sun heat up your meal. Rotate the cooker at least twice an hour to
keep it in the sun’s strongest rays.
124 CONSTRUCT A TOILET-POWERED ZEN
FOUNTAIN




Feel more relaxed with every flush of your
commode.

MATERIALS
Plastic planter
Drill
4 feet (1.2 m) of plastic tubing Waterproof silicone
Shallow plastic dish
Gravel
Decorative stones Hot-glue gun

STEP 1 Drill a hole near the bottom of the planter’s side. Insert a
piece of tube long enough to reach into the toilet tank, and seal
around the tube with waterproof silicone. Let dry for 24 hours and
test for leakages. (This tube will direct overflow water.)

STEP 2 Cover the planter’s bottom with gravel so that the overflow
tube is covered. Nestle a small plastic dish (into which the tiny
waterfall will flow) among the gravel pieces, being sure not to
obscure the dish.

STEP 3 Stack and hot-glue decorative rocks to create elevation for
your tiny waterfall.

STEP 4 On this stack of stones, glue a second piece of tubing,
which will act as your intake tube. Glue more stones on top to
conceal it (along with any cool decorative stuff you want). Aim the
tube toward the plastic dish.
STEP 5 Remove the cover from the basin of your toilet and
connect your intake tube to the tube that feeds the water to your
toilet (that’d be the one that’s connected to the float ball). You may
need to prop up the toilet basin cover to prevent crushing the
plastic tubing.

STEP 6 Direct the overflow tube back into the toilet basin. Each
time you flush, the water travels into your planter and overflows
back into the toilet, completing the loop.




125 DOUBLE YOUR SHOWERHEAD ACTION
Why on earth should you do this? You know
why, you sly dog, you.

MATERIALS
½-inch (1.25-cm) copper fitting union
5-foot (1.5-m) piece of ½-inch (1.25-cm) copper pipe
Copper-pipe cutter
½-inch (1.25-cm) copper T
Four ½-inch (1.25-cm) 90-degree copper elbows
½-inch (1.25-cm) 45-degree copper elbow
Blowtorch and solder
Two ½-inch (1.25-cm) male adapters
Two new showerheads
Wrench
Plumber’s tape

STEP 1 Unscrew your existing showerhead. Screw one half of the
½-inch (1.25-cm) fitting union to the flange.

STEP 2 Using a copper-pipe cutter, cut the pipe into three pieces:
one piece 2 ½ feet (75 cm) long, and two 1 ¼ feet (38 cm), from
which the new showerheads will extend.

STEP 3 Attach the two equal-length pieces of pipe with the copper
T to create the T-shaped framework.

STEP 4 Attach this T-shaped framework to the long piece of pipe
with a 90-degree elbow and then a 45-degree elbow. Solder all
joints.

STEP 5 To the end of the contraption that will connect to the wall,
attach a 90-degree elbow and then the remaining half of the fitting
union. Solder in place.

STEP 6 To the ends of the T-shaped framework, attach 90-degree
copper elbows to point downward. Then attach the male adapters,
then the showerheads. Solder in place.

STEP 7 Screw the two halves of the fitting union together to install
the double showerhead. Use plumber’s tape and a wrench to
create a tight seal.

STEP 8 Scrub-a-dub.
126 CRAFT A TOILET-PAPER DISPENSER
STEP 1 Pull down the corners of a clotheshanger.

STEP 2 Bend one side inward to create a space for the toilet-
paper roll. Straighten the bottom of the hanger to make a
rectangular shape.

STEP 3 Add toilet paper and hang near the can.
127 HANG A MAGNETIC STUD FINDER
STEP 1 Tie a string to a strong magnet.

STEP 2 Dangle it against a wall, and mark where it clings to nails
and screws embedded in the structure.

STEP 3 Look for a pattern in your marks—that’s where the studs
are, and where you should hang that trippy Magic Eye stereogram
you found in your garage.
128 TURN YOUR HARD DRIVE INTO A TOOL
GRINDER
STEP 1 Peel off all the stickers on your hard drive and pry away
its top cover, using a Torx screwdriver to remove any screws.

STEP 2 Strip out the fixings inside the hard drive with the Torx
screwdriver. Remove the actuator (the magnets), the actuator arm,
and the circuit board. Toss these or save them for later projects.

STEP 3 Remove the platter from the spindle and trace it onto the
sandpaper. Then cut out the shape with a craft knife.

STEP 4 Glue the sandpaper to the platter and reinstall it onto the
drive with the aluminum spindle’s bottom under the platter and the
spindle’s round top over the sandpaper.

STEP 5 Attach a molex connector, plug the molex connector into a
power supply, and grind away.
129 CAPTURE SCREWS WITH A MAGNETIC
WRISTBAND
STEP 1 Scrounge up some magnets from your home. You’ll need
one on the large side and several much smaller round magnets.

STEP 2 Use superglue to attach the smaller magnets to the larger
magnet. You’ll want to space them pretty evenly. Let dry.

STEP 3 Make a slit in the top of a terry-cloth wristband that’s big
enough to slide your larger magnet inside.

STEP 4 Slide the larger magnet inside the slit and sew it shut.
When you’re doing basic woodworking stuff, slip this wristband
onto your arm and capture stray metal fasteners with its magnet.
130 RIG THE POOR MAN’S LASER LEVEL
STEP 1 Use a rubber band to secure a suction cup to a basic
carpenter’s level.

STEP 2 Use tape to mount a laser pointer onto the carpenter’s
level at a right angle.

STEP 3 Suction-cup the apparatus to a wall at the height that you
want to hang your object, and turn on the laser pen.

STEP 4 Tilt the laser to make a level line and hang your Picasso.
131 KIT OUT AN INSTANT-CHARGE
SCREWDRIVER




Resuscitate a dead electric screwdriver with
quick-charging supercapacitors.

MATERIALS
3.6-volt cordless rechargeable screwdriver
Phillips screwdriver
Soldering iron and solder
Four supercapacitors, 10F and 2.5-volt
Mini B USB cable
Breakout board for mini USB
Electrical wire

It’s the do-it-yourselfer’s version of Murphy’s Law: Every time you
need to sink some tough screws, the battery in your cordless
screwdriver is dead. So forget those plodding batteries and
shorten recharge time to a minute and a half.

STEP 1 Use a standard Phillips head screwdriver to open up the
rechargeable screwdriver and remove the battery.

STEP 2 Desolder the barrel-shaped charge connector and the
battery connection clip from the screwdriver’s circuit board. Solder
a red wire from the breakout board’s VCC conductor to the
positive pad on the circuit board, and a black wire between the
ground connections of the boards.

STEP 3 Connect two capacitors in series with the positive lead of
one soldered to the negative lead of the other. Repeat with
another pair. Then join the two sets together in parallel (positive to
positive, negative to negative).

STEP 4 Solder the positive leads from the power pack you just
made to the red wires from the switch and the circuit board. Solder
the pack’s negative leads to the black wires.

STEP 5 Widen the charge port on the screwdriver case large
enough to access a mini B USB cable. Fasten the breakout board
to the inside of the screwdriver. Line up the port with the opening,
and reassemble the case.

STEP 6 Plug the screwdriver into a USB port on your computer.
The red LED should glow—when it goes out, in about 90 seconds,
the screwdriver is charged.

STEP 7 Enjoy your new quick-charge screwdriver.
132 MAKE A MINI SCREWDRIVER
STEP 1 Drill a hole in the top of a glue-stick cap that’s slightly
smaller than the screwdriver bit.

STEP 2 Wiggle a drill bit through the hole in the cap.

STEP 3 Put a pencil eraser on the back of the drill bit to secure it
in place.

STEP 4 Screw away.
133 REMOVE A STRIPPED SCREW WITH A
RUBBER BAND
Stripped screws happen. Luckily, you’ve got
that rubber-band ball to use up.

STEP 1 Place a wide rubber band across the head of the screw
you want to remove.

STEP 2 Grab a screwdriver that’s a size bigger than what the
screw is made for.

STEP 3 Through the rubber band, apply hard, slow force to
remove the stripped screw.
134 MAKE A RUBIK’S CUBE–INSPIRED CHEST
OF DRAWERS
Everyone’s favorite gaming cube gets
transformed into clever furniture.

Each drawer swivels to mimic the cube’s trademark
maneuverability, while the colored patches are magnetized so you
can peel them off and arrange them how you like. Cheating never
felt so good.

MATERIALS
Table saw
Straightedge
Three sheets of ½-inch (1.25-cm) plywood
Three sheets of ¼-inch (6.35-mm) plywood
Three pairs of 22-inch (56-cm) full-extension drawer slides with runners
About 60 ½-inch (1.25-cm) flat head screws
Wood glue
Brad nails
Brad nailer
Orbital sander
Primer
White paint
Router with a V-shaped bit
54 ¼-by-1 ¾-inch (0.635-by-3-cm) dowels
Cordless drill with ⅜ inch Forstner bit
Bench saw
45 ⅜ inch (3.75-mm) steel washers
Epoxy glue
36 ⅜-inch (3.75-mm) rare earth magnets
Paint in five colors and black
Two 1-foot (30-cm) lazy Susan bearings

STEP 1 Using a table saw and a straightedge, cut pieces of the ½-
inch (1.25-cm) plywood to make the cases (the boxes that hold the
drawers). Start by measuring and cutting six 2-by-2-foot (60-by-60-
cm) sheets for the tops and bottoms of the cases. Then cut six 24-
by-7-inch (60-by-18-cm) sheets for the sides of the cases.

STEP 2 Still working with the ½-inch (1.25-cm) plywood, cut three
24-by-7 ¾-inch (60-by-19.75-cm) sections for the drawer fronts.
Cut six 21-by-6-inch (54-by-15-cm) sections for the drawer sides.

STEP 3 Begin working with the ¼-inch (6.35-mm) plywood. First,
measure and cut three 22-by-22-inch (56-by-56-cm) pieces for the
drawer bottoms. Then, to make the backs of the drawers, cut three
22-by-6-inch (55-by-15-cm) pieces. For the backs of the cases, cut
three 24-by-7 ¾-inch (60-by-19.75-cm) pieces.

STEP 4 Cut 45 6½-by-6½-inch (16.5-by-16.5-cm) “stickers” from
the ¼-inch (6.35-mm) plywood.

STEP 5 Attach one of the drawer slides to each of the plywood
case side panels with screws, leaving ¼ inch (6.35 mm) at the
front edges, and making sure that the slides will be parallel to each
other when the drawers are constructed.

STEP 6 Assemble the three cases with wood glue and brad nails,
attaching top and bottom panels to side panels with the drawer
slides on the inside. Let dry, then sand.

STEP 7 Prime, sand, and paint the drawers white.

STEP 8 Assemble the three drawers to fit inside these cases using
the bottom, back, and side panels you cut for the drawers. Let dry
and sand.

STEP 9 Attach the drawer runners to the outside of the drawers’
side panels and check that they fit smoothly with the slides inside
the cases.

STEP 10 Attach the faces of the drawers. Let dry and sand.
STEP 11 Use a router with a V-shaped bit and cut grooves in all
the exposed faces, creating the look of cubes.

STEP 12 Drill two dowel-sized holes about three-fourths of the
way through opposite corners of each of the 45 square “stickers.”
Using a Forstner bit, drill a shallow hole in the center of each
sticker for the washer.

STEP 13 To cut the dowels in half, tape them to a piece of scrap
plywood and run them through the bench saw.

STEP 14 Glue the half-dowels into the holes in the stickers, then
epoxy the washers into the shallow holes in each sticker’s center.

STEP 15 Prime, sand, and paint the stickers using a separate
color for each set of nine.

STEP 16 Drill holes in all the exposed faces of the chest for the
dowels and washers of the stickers.

STEP 17 Glue the rare-earth magnets into the center holes of the
faces with epoxy. These should line up perfectly with the washers
in the stickers, with enough clearance for the dowels on either
side.

STEP 18 Rout out a thin layer of plywood from the bottom of the
top case, the top and bottom of the center case, and the top of the
bottom case and screw the lazy Susan bearings into them. Epoxy
the bearings into place.

STEP 19 Attach the stickers to the sides and top, sliding the
dowels into the holes.

STEP 20 Scramble the stickers or make it look solved, and move
them around whenever the whimsy strikes you.
135 SAND TINY TRIM WITH A RAZOR
STEP 1 Remove the blade from a safety razor.

STEP 2 Cut sandpaper to fit the space where the blade used to
be.

STEP 3 Tuck the sandpaper into the blade’s space and sand small
objects and irregular concave edges.
136 MAKE DUCT TAPE DO DOUBLE DUTY
Ah, duct tape. What can you do with it? A better
question may be, what can’t you do with it?


 ROPE IN A PINCH
 Cut the length you need, then roll one edge inward for a pretty
 sturdy rope.

 IMPROMPTU HINGE
 Lay a small rectangle of duct tape across the gap between a
 cabinet’s lightweight door and its frame, then close the door to
 fold the tape into a working hinge.
VACUUM HOSE EXTENDER
Sometimes the hose on your vacuum cleaner isn’t long
enough to get to out-of-reach places—like, say, your ceiling.
Just add a length of PVC pipe to the hose and seal the seam
with the good stuff.

TEMPORARY ROOF SHINGLE
Roof falling apart? Patch it with an improvised shingle of
folded duct tape.

EMERGENCY SUNGLASSES
Fend off glare by folding a length of duct tape in half, cutting a
slit in the center, and tying it around your head.
137 CREATE A LIFE-SIZE CARD-BOARD
CUTOUT
STEP 1 Using a digital camera that shoots at least seven
megapixels, snap a photo of a hilarious person.

STEP 2 Use photo-editing software to delete the background, turn
any negative spaces gray or beige, and enlarge the image to life
size.

STEP 3 Print the image out in sections and tape it together, or
have a copy shop print out the image full size.

STEP 4 Trim the figure out of its background, leaving about a 2-
inch (5-cm) border. Don’t cut out the area between the figure’s feet
—a wide, solid bottom will help support it.

STEP 5 Attach cardboard pieces with spray adhesive to make a
single piece that’s big enough to fit your image.

STEP 6 Mount the image to the cardboard with the spray
adhesive, and trim the cutout with a craft knife.

STEP 7 Cut out two cardboard supports and make slits in the
bottom of your cutout. Slide the supports in to make it stand.
138 LOUNGE IN A CARDBOARD HAMMOCK
STEP 1 Cut cardboard into six strips 4 feet (1.2 m) long and about
1 foot (30 cm) wide, and two pieces 3 feet (90 cm) long and about
2 feet (60 cm) wide.

STEP 2 If you’re recycling cardboard, patch holes and reinforce
tears and weak spots with duct tape.

STEP 3 Duct-tape three of the six long strips together so their
sides touch. Repeat with the other three, then tape the two
sections together end to end.

STEP 4 Tape your remaining two pieces of cardboard over the
center seam on the top and bottom to reinforce it. Use a lot of tape
over each seam.

STEP 5 Make eight holes in the hammock, one at each corner and
two near the center along each long edge.

STEP 6 Thread a piece of rope a little longer than the hammock
through the holes along one side. Repeat on the other side.
STEP 7 Cut a broom handle in half and thread it through the two
holes in the corners of the hammock’s short sides. Reinforce with
duct tape.

STEP 8 Drill two eyebolts at equal height into two nearby trees.
Tie the hammock’s rope to the eyebolts. Take it down if there’s a
chance of rain.




139 CHAT ON A CARDBOARD TELEPHONE
STEP 1 Take an old phone apart, removing the casing around the
electronics.

STEP 2 Cut out pieces of cardboard to fit around the electronics in
your phone’s handset. This will vary according to your phone—
trace its case as a template.
STEP 3 Using a craft knife, cut out spaces in the cardboard
handset through which you’ll be able to access the keypad. Punch
holes in the cardboard that will cover the speaker and the
microphone.

STEP 4 Measure your cardboard handset and create a cardboard
base that the handset can rest on. It should include a protruding
piece of cardboard where the phone's depressor will hit, hanging
up the phone.

STEP 5 Tape the electronics inside the cardboard handset and
base, lining up all components with the various openings in the
cardboard. Make a small opening in the base’s bottom for the
cord.

STEP 6 Dial someone up.




140 HANG UP CARDBOARD BLINDS
STEP 1 Measure your window’s height and width, then add about
20 inches (50 cm) to the height. Cut your cardboard to these
dimensions, with its corrugations running horizontally.

STEP 2 Measure every 5 inches (12 cm) along the cardboard and
mark these lines with a ruler. Using the back of a box cutter, score
along the marks.

STEP 3 Flip the cardboard over and mark halfway between the
scored lines. Score these marks in the opposite direction.

STEP 4 Accordion-fold the cardboard, firmly creasing every other
line in the opposite direction.

STEP 5 With the cardboard all folded up, drill a hole through each
end of the top all the way through to the bottom.

STEP 6 Thread a needle with twine and pull it through the holes
on one side; knot it at the top. Repeat on the other side.

STEP 7 Drill two small eyebolts into the top of the window frame
so that they line up with the string. Hang the blinds.

STEP 8 Fasten clothespins to the bottom of the twine lengths.
When you want more light, push up the clothespins. For darkness,
slide them down and let the cardboard unfold.
141 MAN’S BEST FRIEND GETS A HIGH-TECH
HOME
This dream doghouse comes complete with a
solar heating system, LED lights, and a Wi-Fi
security camera.

Former PopSci photographer John Carnett decided to make this
pooch palace for Pearl, his labradoodle, after she dutifully watched
him build a new house for three years. A standard model just
wouldn’t do, though, so he went a little overboard. After creating
the design with computer-aided design (CAD) software, he added
a solar hot-water radiant-heating system and made a green roof
that retains rainwater, creates oxygen, and improves insulation.
Then he decked it out with a few other touches, including some
colored LED lights to brighten things up and a Web-enabled
wireless video camera that lets him keep an eye on Pearl from his
computer or phone. That’s plenty of features for her, but the
doghouse has one extra benefit for Carnett himself: The battery
that powers it also powers all the low-voltage exterior lights on his
property.

Carnett made a frame of 2-by-4-foot (60-by-120-cm) boards and
walls made of insulated wood panels. The south-facing wall has a
solar panel, which charges the gel battery mounted inside the
house. A solar charge controller, switches, and other parts are
inside a waterproof panel mounted on the exterior for easy
adjustment. When the photovoltaic panels are exposed to sunlight,
a pump circulates glycol fluid through evacuated tubes to a series
of copper pipes underneath the floor. The pipes heat a concrete
backing board below them, which in turn disperses heat through
the hardwood floor into the house.

The porch ceiling contains a waterproof 12-volt LED light, and the
two interior lights go on automatically when it gets dark outside.
That way, Pearl always has a welcoming light on when she comes
home at night.




142 MAKE AN AUTOMATIC PET FEEDER
Not around to feed your pet? Automate that
action and fret about Fido no more.

MATERIALS
Screwdriver
Battery-operated clock
Metal dog-food bowl
Glue
Small, circular metal dish
Tape
Incredibly thin plywood
Saw
Drill
Hammer
Two nails

STEP 1 Using a screwdriver, remove the motor and the second
and hour hands from an old clock.

STEP 2 Glue a small metal dish to the center of your pet’s metal
food bowl to form a central compartment. The dish should be big
enough to hold the motor, and should be level with the bowl’s top.

STEP 3 Tape the motor inside the central compartment and mount
the hour hand to the motor.

STEP 4 Using a saw, cut four plywood dividers that will radiate out
from the central compartment. Insert them.

STEP 5 Cut a piece of very thin plywood to fit over the bowl and
cut away a quarter of it. Drill a hole into the top to accommodate
the bit that extrudes from the motor.

STEP 6 Hammer two nails in the lid so that the hour hand is
between them and, when it rotates, the lid goes with it. Trim so
they don’t get caught on the motor. Put the lid on.
STEP 7 Make a plywood cap that’s large enough to cover the
second hand. Tape the second hand to the cap upside down and
mount it to the lid. It should rotate freely.

STEP 8 Fill the bowl with food. Every three hours, the lid will rotate
and your pet can get more of the good stuff.




143 BUILD A CAT DOOR
Have the mewing beasts let themselves out for
a change with this DIY cat hatch.

MATERIALS
Pencil
Jigsaw Continuous hinge
Tin shears Thin acrylic
Drill
¼-inch (6.35-mm) bolts and nuts
Metal plate
Magnet

STEP 1 Sketch the opening on your door so it’s 9½ inches (24 cm)
wide by 8 inches (20 cm) high.

STEP 2 Cut the hole out with a jigsaw. (If your door is hollow, you’ll
need to secure pieces of thin wood to the top, bottom, and sides of
the hole with glue and brads.)

STEP 3 Measure a piece of continuous hinge to the width of your
hole and cut it with tin shears.

STEP 4 Measure and cut a piece of lightweight acrylic to fit over
the opening. Drill holes into the acrylic that line up with the holes in
the hinge, then attach the hinge with ¼-inch (6.35-mm) bolts and
nuts.

STEP 5 Mount the hinge right above the hole on the inside,
making sure that it swings freely in both directions.

STEP 6 To keep the door from swinging, mount a metal plate to
the hole’s bottom ledge. Drill a hole into the acrylic and insert a
magnet.
144 PUT TOGETHER A HOMEMADE WIND MILL




Kiss those high energy bills goodbye with a
backyard wind turbine.
MATERIALS
Two precut round steel plates 2½ inches (6.35-cm) in diameter
Hole saw
1-inch (2.5-cm) steel tubing
Arc welder
1-inch- (2.5-cm-) thick plywood
Jigsaw
Drill
Screws and wingnuts
4-inch (10-cm) PVC pipe
Aluminum sheeting
Epoxy
¼-inch (6.35-mm) metal rods
Sprockets and chain
Salvaged alternator
Lazy Susan bearing
3-inch (7.5-cm) steel tubing
Charge controller
Four car batteries
DC/AC inverter
Power cord

STEP 1 Using a hole saw, cut holes in the center of the steel
plates that fit the 1-inch (2.5-cm) steel tubing.

STEP 2 Cut the steel tubing to 2 feet (60 cm) in length. Use an arc
welder to connect it to the small plates, making an axle.

STEP 3 Using a jigsaw, cut the 1-inch- (2.5-cm-) thick plywood into
two discs 2 feet (60 cm) in diameter. Drill a hole into their centers
for the steel tubing. Slide the wood onto the axle, screwing the
discs onto the steel plates.

STEP 4 Measure and cut sections of PVC pipe 2 feet (60 cm) in
length; cut them into half-pipes.

STEP 5 Use a jigsaw to cut the aluminum sheeting into three
sections 2 feet (60 cm) long and 1 foot (30 cm) wide.
STEP 6 Drill three evenly spaced holes into one edge of each
PVC half-pipe and attach the aluminum sheeting with epoxy to
form a J shape. Reinforce the J shapes with small screws.

STEP 7 Use epoxy to secure each J shape to the edges of the
discs, with the flat face of the sheeting facing the axis.

STEP 8 Drill three holes in the wood discs so you can slide in
metal rods at the center point of the half-pipes.

STEP 9 Weld a sprocket around the axle’s end and a second
sprocket to your alternator’s spindle. Hook the two up with the
chain.

STEP 10 Fit and weld the lazy Susan bearing to the top of the 3-
inch (7.5-cm) steel tubing. Mount the entire assembly onto the lazy
Susan bearing so it will swivel when the wind blows.

STEP 11 Hook your alternator to a charge controller, then connect
its positive and negative lines to the first car battery. Connect all
four car batteries in a row.

STEP 12 Hook the last car battery to DC/AC inverter, and then
power your home’s circuit box. Check with your local power-supply
company for specifics, if needed.
145 HOOK UP A SOLAR CHARGER
Keep your gadgets powered even when you’re
off the grid.

MATERIALS
Plywood
Jigsaw
Drill
Nails
Hammer
Two 1-inch (2.5 cm) wood slats
5-watt, 12-volt solar panel
Hinge
Soldering iron and solder
¼-inch (6.35-mm) plastic mono plug
Cigarette-lighter Y adapter
12-volt 12AH rechargeable battery
Solar DC charger controller
4 feet (1.2 m) of 18-gauge wire
15-amp DC panel meter
Two female terminal disconnects
STEP 1 Check online to discover your home’s latitude. This is the
angle at which you’ll mount your solar panel.

STEP 2 Cut six pieces of plywood for the box. The lid should be
slightly larger than the solar panel. Trim the top edges of the side,
front, and back pieces to the appropriate angle. Cut the bottom to
fit.

STEP 3 Drill a hole in each side panel for airflow: one in the back
panel for the controller and battery cords, and one in the lid for the
solar panel’s cord. Then nail the wooden slats to the lid and mount
the solar panel to it. Assemble the box with a hinge for the lid.

STEP 4 Snip off the cigarette-lighter plug and solder the ¼-inch
(6.35-mm) mono plug onto the Y adapter. Insert the mono plug
into the controller’s 12-volt output.

STEP 5 Connect all four power leads from the battery and the
solar panel to the controller’s input terminals. Hook up the 15-amp
DC panel meter to the controller’s input terminal for the panel.

STEP 6 Test all connections with the meter. Connect the red wire
with a female-terminal disconnect to the battery’s positive terminal,
and connect the black wire to the negative terminal.

STEP 7 Place the station in the sun with the solar panel pointed
south (north if you’re in the southern hemisphere). Plug something
in!
146 MAKE A GEODESIC DOME OUT OF PVC
PIPE
It’s a classic, and with good reason: It looks rad
and is child’s play to make.

Buckminster Fuller christened this structure in the 1940s, and it’s
been an icon ever since. You too can build its interlocking system
of circles and triangles and know the glee of lightweight, modular
housing.

MATERIALS
65 2-foot (60-cm) pieces of PVC pipe
Ten four-way pipe connectors
Six five-way pipe connectors
Ten six-way pipe connectors
Drill
130 3-inch (7.5-cm) bolt-and- nut sets
260 washers to fit the bolts
Four T-posts
Parachute
Ten bungee cords

STEP 1 Use ten lengths of pipe and the ten four-way connectors
to hook together the circular base.

STEP 2 Fit two lengths of pipe into each four-way connector,
pointing up. This should form triangles.

STEP 3 Hook five five-way and five six-way connectors,
alternating the two types, to the tops of these triangles all around
the first row of the dome.

STEP 4 Fit ten more lengths of PVC between these connectors,
horizontally, for the second row of the dome.

STEP 5 Make another row of triangles by fitting 10 lengths of pipe
into the upward-pointing openings of these connectors.
STEP 6 Connect five six-way connectors to the tops of these
triangles.

STEP 7 Place 10 lengths of pipe horizontally between these
connectors.

STEP 8 Position the last five lengths of pipe into these connectors
so that they’re pointing upward toward the top of the dome. Hook
them into the last five-way connector.

STEP 9 If you like, remove one pipe near the bottom of the dome
to create a doorway.

STEP 10 Drill holes through each connector and its pipes and
secure these with washers, nuts, and bolts (with the bolts on the
outside of the dome) to reinforce the frame. If you’d like to be able
to take your dome down for transport, skip this step.

STEP 11 Drive four T-posts into the ground inside the dome so
that they catch the bottom layer of pipe. This will add stability to
the structure.

STEP 12 Cover the structure with a salvaged parachute or other
piece of fabric, tying it to each of the bottom row’s four-way
connectors with bungee cords.

STEP 13 Decorate your geo dome and veg out.
147 Reuse an Old Garden Hose
Garden hoses don’t die easily, but when they
do wear out, there’s no need to throw out all of
that rubber tubing.




148 MAKE THE LAZY MAN’S MOWER
Mowing the lawn used to suck. Now it kind of
rules.

Grass—it’d be great, if you didn’t have to cut it. Luckily, you can rig
this simple self-propelled lawnmower so it goes in a circle all on its
own, doing most of the work for you while you enjoy a brewski on
the porch.

MATERIALS
Lawnmower
Two rebar posts
Drill
Wooden block
2x4
Nails
Hammer
Twine
6-foot (1.8-m) wooden dowel
Clamps

STEP 1 Locate a good spot in your lawn with equal clearance on
all sides so that the mower can go in a circle without running into
any permanent fixtures.

STEP 2 Drill two holes into a large wooden block, and pound the
rebar into the ground through those holes. Cap it off by nailing a
2x4 on top of the wooden block.

STEP 3 Measure and cut enough twine to reach the outer
perimeter of the area you wish to mow, leaving a bit of excess.

STEP 4 Knot one end of the twine to one of the rebar posts in the
ground.
STEP 5 Knot the other end to the mower and position it as far
away from the posts as possible. The mower will work its way
inward as it moves in circles, winding the twine around the posts
as it goes.

STEP 6 Place a clamp on the mower’s gas lever to keep it moving.
Measure and cut a 6-foot (1.8-m) dowel and secure it to the clamp.
If the mower gets too close to a structure, the dowel will knock off
the clamp, and the engine will shut down.




A GOLF CART POWERED BY THE SPIRIT (AND ENGINE) OF
A TRUCK

One day, Bill Rulien decided he’d had enough of people boasting
about how they had modified their golf carts with hot-rod paint jobs
or monster-truck tires. “I thought, I’m gonna build something that
will say, ‘Well, top this.’ ”

Rulien owns several golf-cart sales shops, so he had his choice of
bodies. What he needed was a bigger engine. He picked out a cart
that he’d been selling for parts and yanked the electric motor,
transmission, and drivetrain. Then he bought an old truck for its V8
engine, drivetrain, steering, and transmission, and began cutting
up its chassis to fit the tiny cart’s body. He shortened the truck’s
driveshaft as well, but he still had to connect the two vehicles. With
steel he had lying around, he fabricated a frame that joins the
cart’s body with the truck’s chassis.

The finished cart clears 120 miles per hour (193 km/h) and can
tear up even the deepest sand traps. Rulien is waiting until golf
season to really push the vehicle, but it has already made an
impression. When a truck driver eyed the beast, he declared,
“Jeez, that’s overkill!” And thus was she christened.
149 SET UP DIY GROW LIGHTS




Create a light system to keep houseplants
thriving during winter’s short days.

Setting up specialized grow lights that mimic the sun’s rays is a
good solution, but you can get similar results with LEDs. We
connected three inside a clear plastic tube to make a “light spike”
that you can stick into a pot for direct exposure, and added a
controller that adjusts the brightness.

MATERIALS
Project box
Drill
2.1-mm power-connector jack
10-position header
100k-ohm slide potentiometer
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical wire
10k-ohm resistor
Wire strippers
White LED design kit
Five clear plastic tubes with endcaps
Five two-position connectors
15-volt 1A wall-mount power supply

STEP 1 Drill six holes in your project box to accommodate the
various components, then assemble the controller by mounting the
power-connector jack inside the box and the 10-position header
and the 100k-ohm slide potentiometer on the box’s sides.

STEP 2 Wire the box according to the circuitry diagram.

STEP 3 Cut the wire inside the LED design kit into five equal
lengths. Attach the red wire to the red connector, and the black
wire to the black connector, on each LED strip. Slip each strip
inside a clear tube, and seal it with the endcaps so that it’s
watertight.

STEP 4 Add the two-position connectors that will hook up the
tubes and the box. Attach each one to the red and black wires
from each LED strip.

STEP 5 Press a spike into your plant container. Keep all wiring,
electrical connections, and the LED strips away from soil and
moisture.

STEP 6 Plug the spikes’ two-position connectors into the control
box’s 10-position header, and connect the power supply to turn the
LEDs on.

STEP 7 Adjust the slide potentiometer to control the brightness of
the spikes, and watch your garden grow.




150 BUILD A CD-CASE GREENHOUSE
STEP 1 Remove the front panels from three plastic CD cases.

STEP 2 Tape the three plastic panels together to make a box with
three sides.

STEP 3 Open a fourth CD case and tape it to the box to make the
last side and a lid with a functioning hinge.

STEP 4 Place it over a small plant and set in the sun.
151 THE ULTIMATE SNOWBLOWER
Keep your driveway clear of the white stuff with
this eight-cylinder blaster.

When Kai Grundt announced he was building a snowblower from
a discarded V8 engine, a friend just laughed. So a year later,
instead of showing him the finished product, Grundt showed him
what it could do. He buried the man’s truck under 7 feet (2 m) of
snow. From two houses away.

Since Grundt, a metal fabricator in Muskoka, Ontario, started with
the huge engine from his old Chevy truck, he knew power wouldn’t
be a problem. The problem would be making the 800-pound (362-
kg) machine easy to handle. He didn’t want the snowblower racing
away when he revved the blades that suck up the snow—the V8’s
crankshaft spins them up to 6,200 rpm—so he chose to run its
tank-like tracks via a different system. Powered by the 412-
horsepower V8, a hydraulic pump feeds a pair of hydraulic motors
that each turn one track. This allows him to give the blades a
boost while keeping the machine moving at a safe pace.

Moving snow can be a frigid business, so Grundt installed a
remote-start system to get the machine warmed up before he
steps outside. The blower doubles as a heater, too. He faced the
engine’s radiator toward the back; an electric fan blows excess
heat right at his legs.

And what about noise control? Twin custom-designed pipes
ensure that there’s no exhaust streaming into the driver’s face
during operation. Grundt also gave the pipes a series of interior
channels that reroute and slow down the expelled air, dampening
the noise. Cutting down on the decibel level also keeps the
neighbors happy.
THAR SHE BLOWS
Using controls built into the handlebars, Grundt can turn one
track forward and the other in reverse, spinning the rig in
place. These handlebars are hollow, and the coolant fluid
flows through them, keeping his hands toasty.
152 RIG A DIY POLYGRAPH TEST




If you suspect somebody’s putting you on,
monitor him with a lie detector test.

MATERIALS
Scissors
Adhesive Velcro
Aluminum foil
Electrical wire
Wire strippers
Arduino UNO
10k-ohm resistor
USB cable
STEP 1 With scissors, cut a strip of Velcro and a strip of aluminum
foil so that they are equal in length and long enough to wrap
around a finger.

STEP 2 Strip the end of a piece of wire, put it on the foil’s center,
and place the adhesive Velcro on top to secure it, sandwiching the
wire between the foil and the Velcro.

STEP 3 Flip the foil over and adhere a small piece of Velcro to this
side, so that you can secure it around a finger with the aluminum
foil inside—this is an electrode. Repeat this process so you have
two electrodes.

STEP 4 Wire the electrodes to the Arduino UNO according to the
circuitry diagram.

STEP 5 Connect the Arduino to your computer using the USB
cable. Then download the “Graph” code found at
popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks onto the Arduino, and run the
processing program on your computer.

STEP 6 Find a person you want answers from. Put the electrodes
on one finger of each of the person’s hands.

STEP 7 A graph pops up. The more the person sweats, the more
conductive his skin becomes, and the higher the line of the graph
goes. Skyrocketing right along with it, of course, is the likelihood
that he is lying.
153 LISTEN IN WITH A FOXHOLE RADIO
When your radio is dead, this throwback device
will do the trick.

Prisoners of war once cobbled together these makeshift radios so
they could get the news. Now you can use one to pick up that final
radio station that hasn’t started online streaming yet.

MATERIALS
Large safety pin
Toilet-paper tube
Magnet wire
Wood pencil stub
Stripped cat 6 cable for antenna and ground
Radiator or metal coat hanger
Wood board
Metal thumbtacks
Blued or rusty razor blade
Earphones
STEP 1 Use a safety pin to poke a hole in the toilet-paper tube,
and secure the magnet wire to the tube by tying one end through
the hole.

STEP 2 Create a coil by wrapping the magnet wire tightly around
the tube 120 times, making sure that the wire is packed closely
together as it coils. The number of coils affects what radio stations
you’ll pick up, so experiment with their arrangement if you aren’t
hearing your desired station clearly.

STEP 3 Make a “cat whisker” by poking the safety pin into the
graphite of a pencil stub’s dull end.

STEP 4 Hang the antenna cable far out the window and attach a
ground cable to a metal radiator inside your home. If you don’t
have a radiator, attach the ground cable to a metal coat hanger
and stick it in the ground outside.

STEP 5 Place the toilet-paper tube and a blued razor blade onto
the wood board and push in two thumbtacks next to the tube and
two next to the razor blade. Wrap the antenna wire around the
components according to the diagram, twisting wires together
when excess is needed.

STEP 6 Peel back the insulation on your headphones’ audio jack.
Use stripped wire to connect the safety pin in the pencil to one of
the audio jack’s wires, and connect the other wire to the ground.

STEP 7 Don your earphones, and touch the pencil lead to the
razor blade. Move the pencil until you pick up the smooth tunes
you desire.
154 TACK UP A DIPOLE ANTENNA
STEP 1 Use wire cutters and pliers to snip a coat hanger and
stretch it into a length of about 52 inches (132 cm).

STEP 2 Make a small U-shaped loop on each end of the coat
hanger’s wires. Sand the loops to remove paint or coating.

STEP 3 Cut a piece of plywood to 1 inch (2.5 cm) in width and 1
foot (30 cm) in length. Screw two ½-inch (1.25-cm) sheet-metal
screws about ¼ inch (6.35 mm) into the wood.

STEP 4 Hook the U-shaped wire loops around the screws.

STEP 5 Slide the U-shaped tabs of a 75- to 300-ohm matching
transformer under the metal screws on the plywood, one per
screw. Tighten the screws until the wire ends and the transformer
tabs are held together against the wood.
STEP 6 To connect a coaxial cable, screw the cable’s F-type
connector into the transformer.

STEP 7 Connect the coaxial cable to the FM radio, turn the
receiver on, and position the antenna for the best signal.

STEP 8 Use a mounting bracket and screws to mount the antenna
where it works the best.




155 CRAFT A CELL-PHONE “CANTENNA”
STEP 1 Use a can opener to remove the bottom of a lidless,
empty can that’s 4 inches (10 cm) in diameter.

STEP 2 Solder the open end of another lidless, empty can to the
first can. The total height should come to 1 foot (30 cm).

STEP 3 Solder a short piece of copper wire to an antenna
connector, and drill a hole for it 3¾ inches (9.5 cm) from the closed
end of the cylinder. Secure it in place with a nut on the inside.

STEP 4 Screw a passive antenna adapter cord to the antenna
connector.

STEP 5 Attach the adapter cord to the back of your phone. (Don’t
have a smartphone? Try a basic pigtail adapter—choose one that
works for your specific phone.)

STEP 6 Enjoy improved reception. Hear what people have to say
for a change.
156 BOOST WI-FI WITH A STEAMER
STEP 1 Use tin snips to remove the steamer’s center post and to
make a hole about ½ inch (1.25 cm) long for the USB modem’s
connector end.

STEP 2 Insert the USB modem into the hole with the connector
end facing downward. Superglue it in place and let it dry.

STEP 3 Zip-tie two sets of two of the steamer’s leaves together so
that all the leaves stay open.
STEP 4 Plug the USB modem’s connector end into the USB
extension cable, and plug the other end of the extension cable into
your laptop’s ethernet portal.

STEP 5 Start picking up Wi-Fi signals from far, far away.




157 HANG HDTV-ANTENNA ART
STEP 1 Strip 14-gauge copper wire, then cut and bend it into eight
V-shaped pieces. Place these wires onto a picture frame so that
the peaks of the V shapes are 5¾ inches (14.5 cm) apart, then drill
a small hole on each side of both V ends.

STEP 2 Strip 22-gauge enameled wire, then attach the V shapes
to the frame by threading the enameled wire through one of the
holes, crossing it over the copper wire, pulling it through the
second hole, and twisting it in back.
STEP 3 Cut two lengths of copper wire to 20 inches (50 cm) in
length, then bend them as shown. Lay them down the center of
the picture frame so that they are 2 inches (5 cm) apart.

STEP 4 Attach the two vertical wires to the V-shaped pieces with
more stripped enameled wire. Make a hole on each side of the two
vertical wires’ ends, then attach them to the frame as you attached
the V-shaped pieces.

STEP 6 Wrap stripped enameled wire around the main vertical
wires where they are bent so that they nearly touch.

STEP 7 Solder two pieces of stripped enameled wire to the bottom
vertical copper wires. Connect these two wires to the matching
transformer, and then connect the transformer to your TV using a
coaxial cable.
158 MOD AN XBOX 360 CONTROLLER INTO A
SMARTPHONE CASE




Why choose between gaming on a smartphone
and gaming on a console?

If you’ve gotten addicted to the feel of a controller in your hands,
this smartphone case mod is for you. The phone’s home button is
cleverly concealed behind one of the face buttons, and both the
charging and audio cords are neatly concealed inside the
controller shell.

MATERIALS
Xbox 360 controller
Torx screwdriver
Phillips screwdriver
Smartphone
Rotary tool
Scissors
Superglue
Foam
3.5-mm audio-jack extension cable
Smartphone wall charger with USB cable
Pliers
STEP 1 Turn over your controller and pull off the battery
compartment’s plastic cover. Peel away the serial-number sticker
inside the battery compartment case and use the Torx screwdriver
to remove the screw underneath it.

STEP 2 Remove the other screws on the controller’s back. Lift the
back off, and remove the bottom plate.

STEP 3 Lift out the circuit board. The thumbsticks, triggers (the
buttons on the back below the left and right bumper buttons), and
rumble pack motors (the cylindrical bits that dangle) will come right
out with it.

STEP 4 Peel away the rubber pads that were behind the circuit
board. Then turn the controller upside down and let all the buttons
fall out.

STEP 5 Turn the controller back over and remove the screws on
the directional pad. Use a screwdriver to release the tabs in the
directional pad’s center. Then remove the directional pad’s front
and back.

STEP 6 Pull the top shelf (the upper part with the right and left
bumper buttons) off the circuit board.

STEP 7 To pry the triggers from the circuit board, apply pressure
to the long rod and pop up the triggers, then pinch their sides, pull
out the springs, and turn them gently to pry them free. Pull the left
thumbstick off the circuit board while you’re at it.

STEP 8 Turn your attention to the controller. Measure a space to
fit your smartphone inside it so that your smartphone’s home key
is as close as possible to a button on the controller. (This may be
the green button, or it may be the left thumbstick.) Cut out this hole
with a rotary tool.
STEP 9 Use a rotary tool to drill multiple small holes in the
controller over your smartphone’s speakers.

STEP 10 Use scissors to cut the rubber pad that was behind the
face buttons, only leaving contacts for functioning buttons. (In the
case of an iPhone, this is the green button.) Reinstall the rubber
pad inside the console shell with the functioning button lined up
with its contact.

STEP 11 Glue all the nonfunctioning buttons back in place, along
with the left thumbstick.

STEP 12 Measure and cut foam to pad the inside of the
controller’s upper shell, with a window the same size as your
smartphone’s screen. Glue the foam inside the console’s hole.

STEP 13 Use a rotary tool to drill a hole in the bottom of the
battery compartment. It should be big enough for the female end
of your audio jack to stick out.

STEP 14 Drill a second hole in the inside wall of the battery
compartment that’s large enough so you can thread through the
audio jack’s male plug. Pull the male end through this hole and
into the main compartment.

STEP 15 Use a rotary tool to cut another hole in the battery
compartment’s back wall, this time large enough to fit the USB end
of the smartphone’s charger cable.

STEP 16 Use a rotary tool to remove the plastic casing from the
smartphone’s charging cable, reducing its size so it will fit inside
the controller. Glue this end inside the controller’s main
compartment, oriented so it will plug into your phone. Then thread
the USB end through to the battery compartment and coil the cord.

STEP 17 Place your smartphone inside the shell, attaching it to
the charging socket and plugging the male end of the audio jack
into its audio input.

STEP 18 Close the upper shell over the smartphone and secure
with screws.

STEP 19 Use your phone as you normally would, and watch
people do a double take.




159 MAKE A PHONE “BOUNCEABLE”
STEP 1 Break a pack of Sugru (a malleable silicone rubber that
sticks to plastics) into four pieces.

STEP 2 Place one piece on each corner of your phone, folding it
over onto the front and back surfaces.

STEP 3 Mold the Sugru as desired on each corner within 30
minutes.

STEP 4 Leave it to cure overnight before using, then fear dropping
it no more.
160 Build a Hands-Free Phone
Ever wonder what people did before
speakerphone? They built this gadget, which
lets you hang up and still hear.

MATERIALS
Perfboard
A-4705 microphone-to-grid transformer
A-3329 output transformer
Microphone
2-inch (5-cm) magnet speaker
Two CK721 transistors
0.01-mF ceramic capacitor
5-mF, 8-volt midget electrolytic capacitor
1-megohm carbon resistor
75k-ohm carbon resistor
Four AA batteries and holder
On/off switch
Electrical wire
Metal panel for electrical grounding
Wood paneling
Foam rubber
Glue
Screws
Soldering iron and solder
Saw
Screwdriver
Rotary tool

STEP 1 Assemble the electronics on the perfboard according to
the circuitry diagram. Leave wire so you can later attach the on/off
switch, speaker, and microphone.

STEP 2 Measure and cut wood to form the sides and bottom of a
box that’s large enough to fit the perfboard, then secure the box
with wood glue and line the interior with foam rubber to act as a
sound insulator. Glue in place.

STEP 3 Use a rotary tool to make holes on the box’s sides for the
speaker and on/off switch.

STEP 4 Place the assembled electronics in the box and secure
the perfboard with screws.Thread the speaker and on/off switch to
their openings on the sides of the box, and screw or glue them into
place.

STEP 5 Cut paneling to form the box’s lid, shaped to fit your
phone’s handset. Cut holes for the mouthpiece and earpiece.

STEP 6 Cut and glue foam rubber so that the earpiece and
mouthpiece fit the lid snugly. (These pieces will insulate against
outside sound and feedback.)

STEP 7 Mount the lid on top of the box and glue the microphone
into the opening for the earpiece under the foam rubber.

STEP 8 Place the setup near your phone. When you receive a
call, place the handset on top of the box with the phone’s earpiece
next to the microphone. Then go about your business while Aunt
Marge rattles on.
161 MAKE A REMOTE DISPLAY FOR YOUR
COMPUTER




This stylish DIY display scrolls scores, news,
weather, and anything else your computer
feeds it.

MATERIALS
Lithium-polymer ion battery
100-mAh lithium-polymer charger
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical wire
5-volt DC-to-DC step-up circuit
On/off switch
Bluetooth modem
1-by-16-character vacuum fluorescent display (VFD)
Custom case (such as a vintage radio case)
LCD Smartie software

STEP 1 Set your soldering iron to below 350°F (176°C). Solder
the lithium-polymer ion battery to the charger.

STEP 2 Solder the lithium-polymer charger’s output to the input of
the 5-volt DC-to-DC step-up circuit. Solder an on/off switch to the
step-up circuit for controlling power.

STEP 3 Connect the step-up circuit’s positive and negative
terminals to the Bluetooth modem and the 1-by-16-character
display. Then connect the Bluetooth modem’s TTL serial output to
the VFD’s TTL serial input.

STEP 4 Build a box to your liking, using a salvaged radio case or
pieces of scrap wood.

STEP 5 Use your computer’s Bluetooth software for pairing and
connecting the computer to the Bluetooth modem. Set the
Bluetooth port for 9600, 8, N, and 1 communication parameters.

STEP 6 Download LCD Smartie. Select the test display device
driver, and enter the Bluetooth COM port number and
communication parameters. Set the screen size to 1-by-16-
characters and apply your changes to LCD Smartie.

STEP 7 Choose the data that you want to stream and go about
your business. Just stay within 50 feet (15 m) of your computer to
ensure a Bluetooth wireless connection.
162 RIG A SMARTPHONE PROJECTOR




Beam your phone’s image onto a wall for an
instant big screen.

MATERIALS
Narrow cardboard box
Box cutter
Fresnel lens
Audio cord
Speakers
Hot-glue gun
Modeling clay
Smartphone

STEP 1 Start with a narrow cardboard box (a shoebox does just
fine) and cut a hole that’s a little smaller than your Fresnel lens
into one of the smaller ends.

STEP 2 Poke a smaller hole into the opposite end of the box that’s
big enough to allow you to run the audio cord from your phone to
the speakers.

STEP 3 Using the hot-glue gun, firmly adhere the Fresnel lens
over the larger hole inside the box.

STEP 4 Place modeling clay on the side of your smartphone, then
position it on that side inside the box with the screen facing the
lens. (The modeling clay helps to stabilize your phone in the box,
but you can still adjust its position to get a better picture.)

STEP 5 Select your entertainment of choice, then set your phone’s
preferences to display in landscape orientation.

STEP 6 Connect your phone to the speakers, threading the audio
cord through the smaller hole.

STEP 7 Close up the box, aim the lens at a blank wall, and switch
off the lights. Then grab some Milk Duds and kick back with a
downloaded movie or the latest episode of The Daily Show. Your
screen should display at a nice 8½ by 11 inches (22 by 28 cm).
163 CHARGE A PHONE WITH SOLAR RAYS
Harness the sun’s rays to keep your phone
juiced on the go.

MATERIALS
Two 3-volt, 20-mA mini solar panels
Wire strippers
Small heat-shrink tubing
Heat gun
Soldering iron and solder
Cell-phone charger
Large heat-shrink tubing
Double-sided tape
Mint tin

STEP 1 Cut the wires on both mini solar panels to 1 inch (2.5 cm)
in length; strip ¼ inch (6.35 mm) of the plastic coating off each
wire.

STEP 2 Cut the small heat-shrink tubing into four 1-inch (2.5-cm)
pieces. Cover the solar panels’ two positive wires with the tubing;
heat to shrink with the heat gun.

STEP 3 Solder the negative lead of one solar panel to the positive
lead of the other. Cover with a piece of small tubing; heat to shrink
with the heat gun.
STEP 4 Cut off 2.5 feet (75 cm) from your charger cord. Strip 2.5
inches (6.35 cm) from the loose end.

STEP 5 Cut ¼ inch (6.35 mm) off the wires inside the cord to
make leads. Cover with the large tubing; heat.

STEP 6 Solder the negative leads of the charger cord wires and
the solar panels together; repeat with the positive leads. Slide
large tubing over them and heat.

STEP 7 Cover the backs of the solar panels with double-sided
tape; secure them inside the tin.

STEP 8 Tuck the wires into the tin and close it. To use, open up
the tin and let the solar panels juice up.




164 MAKE A SMART-PHONE TRIPOD
Take steady smartphone shots with a sporty
improvised tripod.

STEP 1 Cut a tennis ball in half.

STEP 2 With a pen, mark three “feet” on the bottom. (These will
allow the tennis-ball half to balance.) There should be about 2
inches (5 cm) between each foot.

STEP 3 Cut slight arches between the tripod feet.

STEP 4 Make a slit in the top of the tennis ball and insert a
charger port.

STEP 5 Plug your phone into the port and snap away.
165 TURN YOUR OLD NETBOOK INTO A
TOUCHSCREEN TABLET




Forget dropping big bucks on a fancy new
tablet—just hack your own.

MATERIALS
Netbook
Screwdriver
Putty knife
Touchscreen overlay
Epoxy
Moldable silicone, if needed
Flash drive
Keyboard
Mouse
Retractable stylus

STEP 1 Turn off and unplug your netbook, then use a screwdriver
to remove its bezel and the display’s backing so that the LCD
panel and its cables are exposed. Then remove the keyboard and
trackpad. (This may involve removing screws from the base of the
netbook and prying off the top case with a flat tool, such as a putty
knife.)

STEP 2 Place the netbook’s exposed LCD panel over the area
where the keyboard and trackpad used to be, taking care to avoid
damaging the panel’s cables. Don’t cover any areas that the
netbook uses for ventilation.
STEP 3 Remove the paper on the back of the touchscreen overlay
to reveal the adhesive backing. Place it over the LCD panel.

STEP 4 Plug the touchscreen overlay’s USB cable into the
netbook’s USB port. It will be either an internal port on the
motherboard, or an external port as on most computers.

STEP 5 Reattach the bezel to the front of the converted netbook
with epoxy. If parts of the bezel cover the touchscreen, remove
them before reattaching. If there is too much space between the
bezel and the base of the netbook tablet, fill the gap with moldable
silicone, sealing the two parts together. Let dry for 24 hours.

STEP 6 Copy the drivers that came with the touchscreen overlay
onto a flash drive and plug the drive into the newly modified
netbook tablet. Connect a keyboard and mouse to the tablet and
install the drivers.

STEP 7 Run the calibration tool and use the stylus to calibrate the
touchscreen overlay.

STEP 8 Touch away on your new ad hoc touchscreen tablet, and
chuckle at suckers who spent a bundle on a brand-new one.
166 FASHION A DIY STYLUS FOR YOUR
TOUCHSCREEN DEVICE
Cobble together a stylus and keep your greasy
fingers off that tablet.

MATERIALS
Small scissors
Conductive foam
2-mm drafting lead holder
Plastic ink tube from a ballpoint pen

STEP 1 Use the small scissors to cut a piece of conductive foam
to a cube shape about ¼ inch (6.35 mm) in length on all sides.

STEP 2 Trim the conductive foam down further to create a
rounded tip.
STEP 4 Drop the piece of foam into the lead holder and use the
plastic ink tube from a ballpoint pen to push the foam down until it
protrudes just out of the tip of the holder. Discard the ink tube.

STEP 5 Pinch the holder’s tip to secure the foam in place. Try it
out on a tablet near you.




167 PROTECT YOUR TOUCHSCREEN WITH
THIN VINYL
STEP 1 Measure and cut a piece of thin, nonadhesive vinyl
sheeting to cover the phone’s touchscreen.

STEP 2 Wipe away any dust on the vinyl and on your phone’s
screen.

STEP 3 Line up the vinyl with the touchscreen and slowly apply it,
smoothing out air bubbles as you press it down.
168 STASH A FLASH DRIVE IN A CASSETTE
STEP 1 Using a small screwdriver, pry off the USB drive’s plastic
casing.

STEP 2 Decide where you want the flash drive to poke out of the
cassette. Then trace the flash drive’s connector end onto that spot.

STEP 3 Remove the small screws holding the cassette together
with the small screwdriver.

STEP 4 Cut out the traced area with a rotary tool.

STEP 5 Wind the tape so that it’s on the spool farther away from
the hole for the flash drive.
STEP 6 Tape the flash drive down inside the cassette with
electrical tape so that its end sticks out through the hole.

STEP 7 Reassemble the cassette, load up the flash drive with a
playlist of songs, then gift it as a throwback “mix tape.”




169 MAKE A PINK-ERASER FLASH DRIVE
STEP 1 Remove the flash drive’s plastic casing.

STEP 2 Find two erasers of the pink, parallelogram variety. Cut off
the end of one, starting where the end begins to slant down. Cut
the other to roughly one-third the original length.

STEP 3 Use a craft knife to hollow out both erasers. Test to make
sure the flash drive fits nicely.

STEP 4 Stick the drive inside the larger eraser, then cap it off with
the smaller one. There you have it: a discreet flash drive that holds
your top-secret documents—almost as if they’ve been “erased.”
170 FAKE IT WITH A SAWED-OFF FLASH DRIVE
STEP 1 Peel off the plastic cover of the USB drive. (It helps to pick
a flash drive that’s on the smaller side.)

STEP 2 Use a craft knife to make deep cuts in the casing along
both sides of the connective end of a USB cord, piercing to the
metal shell underneath. Peel off the plastic casing to get at the
inner parts.

STEP 3 Use a small screwdriver to pry apart the metal shell.
Remove the “lid.”

STEP 4 Underneath this lid are a few wires and miscellaneous
plastic bits. They’re in your way, so go ahead and cut them out
with a craft knife.

STEP 5 Grab the flash drive, and protect its back (where there are
metal parts that require insulation) with electrical tape.
STEP 6 Apply epoxy to the inside of the opening you’ve made in
the end of the cord, then slide the USB drive inside.

STEP 7 Hack the cord, fray the wires as desired, and plug it into
your computer. Await sounds of horror.




171 HOUSE A FLASH DRIVE IN A LEGO
STEP 1 Peel off the plastic casing on the flash drive.

STEP 2 Find a LEGO brick large enough to house the drive (a 2x6
one is ideal). Using a rotary tool, scrape out the brick’s insides.

STEP 3 Measure the USB connector to get the dimensions that
you’ll need for the hole in the LEGO. Keep in mind that the hole
should fit the USB snugly, allowing the business end to protrude
and plug into your computer.

STEP 4 Draw a rectangle of these dimensions against the small
end of the brick. Cut the shape out with a rotary tool.
STEP 5 Use the rotary tool to remove the top from a second
LEGO of the same size and color.

STEP 6 Tape the flash drive to the top’s underside with electrical
tape.

STEP 7 Glue the LEGO top to the hollowed-out LEGO, allowing
the USB connector to stick out the end.




172 HACK A FOOT-OPERATED MOUSE




Take some strain off the old wrist with a funny
foot-powered mouse.
MATERIALS
½-inch (1.25-cm) PVC sheet
Bedroom slippers
Two roller lever switches
Optical mouse
Rotary tool
Small hand file
Soldering iron and solder
Electrical wire
Metal brackets
Nuts, bolts, and washers
Screwdriver
Metal wire
Screws and nails
7 feet (2 m) of ¾-inch (1.9-cm) clear plastic tubing
Rubber doorstops

STEP 1 On the PVC sheet, position and trace your slippers the
way your feet would rest while you’re seated. Mark places for the
left- and right-click roller lever switches near the left slipper, where
your foot will operate the mouse, then outline the mouse slightly to
the left of the right slipper’s top.

STEP 2 Using the rotary tool, channel out holes for the roller lever
switches and a hole for the mouse. Use the file to smooth the
edges of the holes.

STEP 3 Remove the mouse’s top cover from the base. Lift out the
circuit board and remove the scroll wheel.

STEP 4 On the bottom of the circuit board, locate where the
mouse’s switches once connected to its buttons. Solder a length of
electrical wire to each of the mouse’s outboard solder connections.

STEP 5 Put the circuit board back inside the mouse cover. Solder
the lead wires from the outboard solder connections to the left and
right roller lever switches—the wire from the original left-click
switch to the new left switch, and the right to the right.

STEP 6 Secure two metal brackets to the mouse with two nuts,
bolts, and washers. Screw the brackets into the underside of the
PVC sheet so that the mouse is belly up.

STEP 7 Thread small pieces of metal wire through the mounting
holes in each roller lever switch. Bend the ends and use nails to
secure the switches under the PVC sheet.

STEP 8 Screw plastic tubing around the edges of the PVC sheet
and in between where your feet go to create bumpers that help
guide your feet.

STEP 9 Trim four rubber doorstops to work as risers, propping the
PVC sheet up off the floor and providing clearance for the mouse.
Screw one to each corner of the footboard.

STEP 10 Plug the mouse’s USB connector into your computer and
scroll with your feet.
173 TRICK OUT YOUR COMPUTER TOWER
WITH ENGRAVING
This is one tower mod that doesn’t belong
hidden under your desk.

MATERIALS
Paper and pencil or printer
Computer tower
Screwdriver
Spray paint
Plexiglas sheet
Masking tape
Safety goggles
Rotary tool
Small engraving bits
Screws and bolts
Fluorescent strip, if needed

STEP 1 Draw or print your design on a sheet of paper to fit the
tower’s side panel.

STEP 2 Unscrew the metal side panel from your computer tower
and set it aside for later.

STEP 3 Spray-paint a sheet of Plexiglas with a color to match your
case so only the engraved design will be visible later. Let dry.

STEP 4 Tape the drawn or printed design onto your Plexiglas
sheet, being sure to tape it over the painted side.

STEP 5 Put on your safety goggles and, using the rotary tool,
begin engraving. Follow the lines of your design on the paper and
etch it on the Plexiglas beneath. Work carefully and slowly to avoid
ruining your design.

STEP 6 Remove the taped-on template and wipe down the
engraved Plexiglas.

STEP 7 Measure and cut a hole slightly smaller than your
Plexiglas in the metal panel.

STEP 8 Drill four holes into the corners of the Plexiglas and the
case. Attach the etched panel to the metal frame with screws
small enough that it will fit inside the case.

STEP 9 If your machine lacks a fluorescent strip, install one, either
plugging it into the power supply or directly to the circuit board.
(Which you choose depends on the bulb you’ve purchased, and
what sort of machine you have.)

STEP 10 Use the original bolts and screws to reattach the metal
panel with the Plexiglas inside the tower.
174 TURN YOUR LAPTOP INTO A
WHITEBOARD
STEP 1 Cut static-cling or sticky whiteboard paper to fit your
laptop’s top.

STEP 2 Apply the whiteboard paper to your laptop. Add an
adhesive Velcro dot.

STEP 3 Stick adhesive Velcro to the back of a whiteboard marker.
Then get doodling.
175 DYE YOUR LAPTOP
Fight the monotony of boring case colors with a
laptop dye job.

MATERIALS
White plastic laptop
Small screwdriver
Sandpaper
Denatured alcohol
Paper towel
Rubber gloves
Deep pan
8 cups (2 L) water
Fabric dye
2 tablespoons table salt

STEP 1 Carefully take apart your laptop. You’ll likely need a small
screwdriver to remove the screws that hold the case, battery, and
other parts in place. Separate the plastic parts (the ones you’ll be
dyeing) from the metal and electronic parts.

STEP 2 Sand down the plastic pieces to remove the glossy layer,
which prevents dye from absorbing quickly and evenly. Leave it if
you don’t want a matte laptop, but the process takes longer and
results in splotchiness.

STEP 3 Clean all the parts with denatured alcohol and a paper
towel, then let them dry.

STEP 4 Wearing rubber gloves, fill your deep pan with 8 cups (2
L) of water. Add the dye to the water along with 2 tablespoons of
table salt. Stir together.

STEP 5 Place the pan on the stove and heat. When the water
starts to boil, submerge the part you wish to dye.
STEP 6 Add water if the liquid boils off, and stir every once in a
while. Larger parts require more time.

STEP 7 Once you’re satisfied with a part’s dye distribution,
remove it from the bath, wipe it down, and rinse it with cold water.
Dry thoroughly.

STEP 8 Reassemble your laptop. Resume being awesome.




176 MAKE A STEAMPUNK-INSPIRED LAPTOP
CASE




Give your high-tech machine an old-school
Victorian vibe.
MATERIALS
Laptop
Tracing paper
Double-sided heavy-duty adhesive sheet
Wood veneer sheeting
Sandpaper
Craft knife
Hot water
Masking tape
Paint and paintbrushes
Polyurethane
Superglue
Miscellaneous embellishments

STEP 1 Lay tracing paper over the back of your laptop and trace
where the wood veneer will go, leaving holes for plugs, fans, and
hatches that allow you access to the computer’s insides.

STEP 2 Open up your laptop and, using the same method, create
patterns for the frame around the screen and the area surrounding
the keyboard.

STEP 3 Apply a heavy-duty adhesive sheet to the blank side of
the wood veneer sheeting.

STEP 4 Sand the veneer for a smooth look and feel.

STEP 5 Tape the tracing paper onto the wood veneer and cut it
out using a craft knife. Cut out the veneer pieces to go around the
screen and keyboard, too.

STEP 6 In the corners of the veneer, cut diagonal slits so that you
can fold the veneer over the laptop’s corners.

STEP 7 Soak the veneer in hot water to make it pliant. Be sure to
dry off excess water before applying the veneer to your computer
—for extra security, remove the battery before placing the veneer
on the laptop.
STEP 8 Use masking tape to secure the wood to the laptop. Let it
dry so it can mold nicely to the computer’s shape, then remove it
and set it aside.

STEP 9 On your laptop, use tape to mask off any areas that the
veneer won’t cover, including the hinge. Then paint those areas a
color of your choosing.

STEP 10 Peel away the veneer’s adhesive backing and apply the
veneer to the laptop, starting with the inside pieces. Don’t press
down until you’ve got it lined up perfectly, then go slowly and press
out air bubbles as you apply it. Cut away any excess material.

STEP 11 Mask off areas that aren’t covered with veneer, then coat
the veneer with polyurethane.

STEP 12 Add any desired embellishments with superglue. Apply
another coat of polyurethane to make it for keeps.
177 TURN ON YOUR COMPUTER WITH A
MAGNET SWITCH
Dupe would-be information thieves with a
handy on/off switch mod.

MATERIALS
Screwdriver
Computer tower with plastic front panel
Wire strippers
Reed switch
Steel or iron nut
Electrical tape
Small magnet
STEP 1 Open your computer tower and remove the front panel,
exposing the wires attached to the power button. Cut one of the
wires, and strip both ends.

STEP 2 Place the reed switch between the two wire ends and
twist them together, sandwiching the reed switch.

STEP 3 Tape the reed switch to the inside of the front panel of
your computer and tape or glue the steel or iron nut next to it.
Close the computer back up.

STEP 4 To turn on your computer, push the power button and stick
a magnet to the case where the reed switch is located—the nut
should hold the magnet in place. If someone tries to turn your
computer on without the magnet, they’ll have no luck.




178 PRINT SECRETS WITH INVISIBLE INK
Bet the CIA sure wished it had come up with
this printer hack.
MATERIALS
Inkjet printer
UV invisible ink
Syringe
UV lamp

STEP 1 Open up your inkjet printer and extract one of the ink
cartridges. Remove its cap and pull out the sponge.

STEP 2 Rinse out the sponge and the inside of the cartridge until
the water runs clear, then put the clean sponge back inside the
cartridge.

STEP 3 Use a syringe to inject invisible ink into the sponge.
Replace the cartridge’s cap and put the cartridge back inside the
printer.

STEP 4 Adjust your computer’s settings to print using only the
color that you’ve replaced with invisible ink.

STEP 5 View the secret info on the documents by holding them up
to a UV lamp.
179 FAKE OUT THIEVES WITH A DESKTOP
HACK
Deter computer raiders with a wallpaper that
looks just like your desktop—but isn’t.

STEP 1 Take a screenshot of your computer’s desktop, then set
the screenshot as your wallpaper.

STEP 2 Hide the real icons in another folder.

STEP 3 Sit back and watch people try to open your desktop’s
unclickable folders.

180 SHIELD YOUR SCREEN FROM PRYING
EYES
Sick of snoops looking at your screen?
Improvise your own privacy monitor.

MATERIALS
LCD monitor
Craft knife
Paintbrush
Paint thinner
Paper towels
Piece of plastic
Old glasses
Tape
Superglue

STEP 1 Unplug an old LCD monitor and remove the plastic frame
around it.
STEP 2 Use a craft knife to cut around the screen’s edge, then
peel back both the polarized and the antiglare films. Hang on to
the polarized layer and remember its orientation.

STEP 3 Apply paint thinner to loosen the glue on the monitor’s
screen—don’t drip it on the monitor’s frame. Then wipe it off with
paper towels and scrape off the softened glue with a piece of
plastic.

STEP 4 Reassemble your monitor. At this point, when you turn it
on, the screen looks white and blank. If you hold up the polarized
film, you should see images on the screen.

STEP 5 Pop the lenses out of a pair of old glasses. Tape the
lenses to the polarized film and trace around them.

STEP 6 Hold the polarized film lenses up as though you were
wearing them, and look at the monitor. If you can see the images
on the screen, cut out the lens-shaped film pieces with your craft
knife.

STEP 7 Glue the polarized lenses onto your glasses. Put them on,
and enjoy the invisible images on your screen.
181 SET UP A LAPTOP COOLING SYSTEM




Chill down your machine with copper’s thermal
conductivity.

MATERIALS
Rotary tool
Paper
Scissors
Sheet of 0.5-mm copper plating
Tin snips
6-mm center-tapped lip and spur drill
Two pieces of 6-mm copper tubing, each 2 inches (5 cm) in length
Solder and soldering iron
Plastic tubing
Rubber tubing
Bilge pump

STEP 1 If necessary, use the rotary tool to cut away at your
laptop’s plastic casing until the fins of your computer’s internal
radiator and heat sink are exposed.

STEP 2 Experiment to determine how big the fins of your heat
extractor should be. Try inserting strips of paper between the fins
of your computer’s heat sink, cutting them down until they fit
perfectly. For maximum cooling, the fins should fit as deep into the
heat sink as possible.

STEP 3 Once you’ve determined the necessary measurements for
your copper heat extractor’s fins, clean the copper sheet with soap
and water. Using one of your paper fins as a template, trace seven
copper fins.

STEP 4 Trace two holes 6-mm in diameter along one of the short
edges in each fin, positioning the holes ? inch (16 mm) apart. The
6-mm copper tubing should fit snugly through these holes, once
you’ve drilled them.

STEP 5 Cut out the copper fins with tin snips and use the lip and
spur drill to cut out the holes. Set the drill to a slow speed and do
your drilling on a flat surface to prevent the copper sheet from
warping.

STEP 6 Thread the fins onto the two lengths of copper tubing. You
can temporarily place coins between the fins to help space them
evenly so that they’ll line up with the heat sink’s indentations.
Solder the tubes and fins together.

STEP 7 Cut a piece of plastic tubing to a length of about 1 ½
inches (3.75 mm). Heat it until you can bend it to fit over both
pieces of copper tubing on one side of the fin-and-tubing
contraption. Insert the contraption into your computer’s heat sink.

STEP 8 Hook two lengths of rubber tubing to the bare pieces of
copper tubing that are plugged into your computer’s heat sink.
Connect these two lengths of rubber tubing to a bilge pump filled
with water. Power it up and the water will circulate, carrying heat
from the heat skink and keeping your computer cool.




182 CONTROL YOUR MOUSE FROM AFAR
Direct your mouse with a simple laser pointer.

MATERIALS
Optical mouse
Laser pointer, less than 10 mW

STEP 1 Lean your mouse against your computer monitor so that
it’s propped upright with its belly facing out.
STEP 2 Identify your mouse’s sensor, which looks like a tiny
bubble tinted black.

STEP 3 Shine the laser pointer directly at the sensor. Once you
get a lock on the sensor, you can move it around in the mouse’s
vicinity to control your computer’s cursor.




183 MAKE AN EXTERNAL HARD DRIVE
STEP 1 Salvage a working hard drive from a laptop or a computer
tower.

STEP 2 Locate the ports on a hard drive case’s baseplate, then
attach them to the hard drive.

STEP 3 Line up the holes in the drive and baseplate and screw
them together.

STEP 4 Slide these parts inside the case. Screw on the faceplate,
lining up its holes with the ports to keep them accessible.
184 ADD KEYBOARD THUMBTACKS
STEP 1 Remove the keys from the keyboard, and cut off the
excess plastic on the back of each key with a rotary tool.

STEP 2 Widen the hole in the back of each key using a rotary tool.
Put a dab of glue in the hole.

STEP 3 Insert a pushpin into the hole, pointy end facing out. Pin
up something important.
185 RIG A SUPERPORTABLE KEYBOARD
Gut a keyboard to get to the touch-sensitive
membrane inside.

MATERIALS
USB keyboard
Screwdriver
Transparent contact paper
Superglue
Adhesive stickers

STEP 1 Use a screwdriver to deconstruct the keyboard. The good
stuff is in the middle: It’s the three-layer membrane and the
attached control board, which feeds the USB wire.

STEP 2 Remove and reserve the membrane’s control board and
switch pad (the rubber pad that presses the control board’s
contacts to the membrane).
STEP 3 Using the switch pad, board, and nuts and bolts,
reassemble the membrane to the control board. The traces of the
membrane should line up with the traces on the control board. (If
your keyboard had a socket and ribbon cable, reinsert the cable.)

STEP 4 Cover both sides with transparent contact paper, and
apply glue to the edges to keep the three membranes in place.

STEP 5 Apply adhesive stickers for each key, taking care to place
the stickers on the keys’ contacts. (For instance, the space bar is
huge, but the contact is small, so you’ll want to be sure that you
put the sticker directly on the contact—just not on the key.)

STEP 6 Roll it up and be ready to type anywhere.
186 CREATE A GLOWING MOUSEPAD




Brighten up your all-night gaming sessions
with this LED-lit mousepad.

MATERIALS
Safety goggles
Plexiglas
Tablesaw with a glass-cutting blade
Rotary tool with glass-safe bit
Two small white LED lights
Electrical wire
USB connector
Clear tape
Printed design, if desired

STEP 1 Decide what size and shape you’d like your mousepad to
be. Then, wearing safety goggles, use a table saw with a glass-
cutting blade to cut the Plexiglas to size.

STEP 2 Fit your rotary tool with a glass-safe bit, then use it to
round the Plexiglas’s edges and wear them down. The more
surface area that you make opaque, the more light your mousepad
will emit.

STEP 3 Use your rotary tool to carve a channel into the Plexiglas,
starting from the top center of the glass and forking into two
channels about 1 inch (2.5 cm) down.

STEP 4 Use the rotary tool to extend the two channels parallel to
the glass’s top edge, ending 1 inch (2.5 cm) from the Plexiglas’s
edges.
STEP 5 Attach pieces of electrical wire to the LEDs’ leads, then
peel back the plastic on your USB cord. Attach the two positive
wires and two negative wires on the LEDs to the USB cord’s
positive and negative wires.

STEP 6 Place the LEDs and wires into the carved channels and
secure them with clear tape. Cover the mousepad with a design, if
you like.

STEP 7 Plug the USB into your computer, dim the lights, and get
your game on.




187 UPCYCLE AN OLD CIRCUIT BOARD
So a gadget’s circuit board is down for the
count. There are still countless things you can
do with it.


 AN EVEN GEEKIER CLIPBOARD
 Use a heat gun and pliers to strip off all the solder and bits
 and bobs, then apply laminate to make it smooth. Swap the
 clip from an old clipboard onto your new, high-tech version.

 NERDTASTIC GUITAR PICK
 Use a soldering iron to remove any electrical components on
 the circuit board, then use a rotary tool to cut out a guitar pick
 shape. Sand it until it’s smooth and start picking.

 META MOUSE PAD
 Desolder a circuit board so that it’s bare and cover both sides
 with vinyl. Plop your new mousepad on your desk and get
 your scroll on.

 LIGHT UP THE CIRCUIT
 Form a box shape with four stripped circuit boards and drill
 holes in their corners. Fasten them together with zip ties, and
 hook this box up to a hanging light-socket assembly for some
 nice spotlight action.
188 MAKE A LAPTOP STAND FROM A BINDER
STEP 1 Using a metal saw, cut a piece of aluminum rail so it’s the
length of a ring binder. Then use a metal file to round the rail’s
edges so you don’t get scraped.

STEP 2 Place double-sided tape on the inner side of the rail.

STEP 3 Drill two sets of two holes big enough for bolts—one set
through the rail and one set through the binder.

STEP 4 Line up the holes and attach the rail and binder with the
bolts, securing them with a nut on the underside. Cover these
bolts with tape to avoid scratches on the laptop.
STEP 5 Measure and cut a strip of no-skid felt to the dimensions
of the rail, then adhere it to the inner side of the rail. Measure and
cut a larger sheet of felt so that it covers the top of the binder and
secure it with adhesive. It will prevent your laptop from sliding
around.

STEP 6 Use a rotary tool to cut a hole into the binder’s corner for
cords to pass through.




189 BUILD A USB HUB INTO YOUR DESK
STEP 1 Remove your computer, cords, and other electronics from
your work station to protect them from sawdust.

STEP 2 Measure your hub and mark a spot for it on a wood
desktop using a pencil and ruler.

STEP 3 Use a jigsaw to cut out the opening, tracing your marked
lines. It’s better to cut it slightly smaller than your hub (you can
always sand it) than too big (you’d have to fill any gaps with
caulking).
STEP 4 Remove the plug of wood and insert your USB hub to
make sure it fits. Use sandpaper to adjust and smooth the
opening.

STEP 5 Use epoxy to attach the USB hub to the inside of the hole;
let dry.

STEP 6 Run the input cord from the USB hub up behind your desk
to your computer.

STEP 6 Next time you need to plug something in, forget reaching
around your monitor: Just plug it into the hub on your desk.




190 STASH YOUR PRINTER IN A DRAWER
STEP 1 Remove the front panel of a drawer and drill a hole into
the back panel for cables. (It’s better to do this in a lower drawer
so that the weight of your printer doesn’t stress the structure.)

STEP 2 Measure and cut two evenly spaced recessed areas for
the utility hinges on the front edge of the bottom panel. This way,
the bottom and front panels will line up neatly when you reattach
the front.

STEP 3 Line up the front and bottom panels and screw on the
utility hinges.

STEP 4 With the front panel lowered, screw the support hinges to
the drawer’s side panels and then to the front panel.

STEP 5 Place your printer in the drawer and feed the cables
through the hole in the back to attach it to your computer (or, if it’s
wireless, to a power source).




191 MOUNT STUFF BEHIND YOUR MONITOR
STEP 1 If you have limited desk space, use the back of your
monitor for storage. Apply double-sided tape or adhesive Velcro
strips to your computer monitor’s back, or purchase plastic hooks
with suction cups or Velcro backing.

STEP 2 Begin attaching office supplies you need—tape, tissues,
notecards, a stapler, or a holder for pens and scissors—and
maybe some you don’t. (Hey, candy and headphones can make
the workday go faster.)

STEP 3 Be sure to use lightweight materials so that your monitor
doesn’t tip over. Also, keep the fan clear of obstacles. Otherwise,
your machine could overheat, which is much more inconvenient
than not having any drawers.




192 ORGANIZE LOOSE CABLES
STEP 1 Remove the dome from a CD spool. Cut a slit on the
bottom of the dome; cut another slit opposite it.

STEP 2 Wind cables around the spool and run the ends through
the slits.
STEP 3 Tug on one end of a cable to adjust how much of it
extends outside the dome.




193 MAKE A FLOPPY-DISK BOX
Solve the double problem of a messy desk and
a surplus of useless floppies with one simple
DIY craft.

MATERIALS
Five floppy disks
Drill
Twelve zip ties
Scissors

STEP 1 Locate the tiny dimples on the back of each floppy disk.
Drill through these dimples, repeating until you have holes in each
corner of four of your five disks.

STEP 2 Place two of the four floppies in front of you so that their
holes are aligned. Thread a zip tie through the two holes at the
bottom, and then another zip tie through the two holes at the top.

STEP 3 Repeat with two more disks, then connect the four
floppies into a box shape.

STEP 4 Drill four holes in the fifth floppy, this time slightly above
the dimples. This is the box’s bottom.

STEP 5 To secure the bottom floppy to the box, line it up with one
of the sides at a 90-degree angle. Thread a zip tie through the
bottom’s holes and the holes in the side.

STEP 6 Close the box and thread zip ties through the remaining
holes in the bottom and side pieces. Cut off the ends of the zip
ties.

STEP 7 Tighten and trim the zip ties, then stock the box with pens
and revel in your newfound tidiness.
194 GET PUMPED WITH A CD DUMBBELL
CDs are pretty much obsolete. But having
jacked arms never gets old.

MATERIALS
½-inch (1.25-cm) solid threaded rod
Ruler
Permanent marker
Table vise
Reciprocating saw or hacksaw
Four ½-inch (1.25-cm) washers and nuts
About 150 CDs
½-inch (1.25-cm) wrench

STEP 1 Measure and mark 6 inches (15 cm) from one end of the
rod. (This is where the first CD stack will end.)

STEP 2 Place one hand on the rod, leaving about ½ inch (1.25
cm) of clearance between your hand and the mark. Make a
second mark about ½ inch (1.25 cm) from the opposite side of
your hand.

STEP 3 Measure and make a third mark 6 inches (15 cm) from the
second mark for the second CD stack.

STEP 4 Place the rod in a table vise. Saw off any excess at the
third mark with a reciprocating saw or a hacksaw.

STEP 5 Thread a nut onto both sides of the rod to the marked
lines in the center. Add a washer on both sides.

STEP 6 Put about 75 CDs on each end, and slide on a washer
and nut on both ends. Tighten with a wrench.

STEP 7 Pop your new 10-pound (4.5-kg) dumbbell out of the vise
and do a few reps—you might not get ripped, but you’re well on
your way to getting sculpted biceps.




195 ASSEMBLE A CEREAL-BOX
SPECTROMETER
See the rainbow inside everyday light sources
with this easy setup.

MATERIALS
Safety glasses
Thick gloves
CD
C-clamp
Craft knife
Cereal box
Tape
Light source
STEP 1 Wearing a pair of safety glasses and thick gloves, clamp a
CD down on a surface edge. Score it across the center with the
craft knife, then break it in half.

STEP 2 Make a horizontal slit about 1 inch (2.5 cm) in length in
one side of a cereal box, near the box’s top. It should be about the
width of a coin.

STEP 3 In the opposite side of the box, straight across from the
first incision, make another slit. Then extend this cut to the front
and back of the box, sloping down at a 45-degree angle with your
craft knife. It should be deep enough for the CD half to at least
partially slide into. Secure the CD in place with tape.

STEP 4 Cut a ½-by-½-inch (1.25-cm-by-1.25-cm) square hole in
the box above the CD slice.

STEP 5 Hold the box up with the slit facing your light source. Look
through the viewing hole at the top to see the rays of light
separated on the CD inside the box.
A PORTABLE X-RAY MACHINE

Late one night, Adam Munich found himself talking with two
guys online: one who complained of rolling electricity
blackouts and one who had broken his leg in Mexico and said
his local hospital couldn’t find an X-ray machine. The two
situations fused in Munich’s mind; he wondered if a cheap,
reliable, battery-powered X-ray machine existed. After
discovering that the answer was no, he spent two years
building one himself out of nixie tubes, old suitcases, chain-
saw oil, and electronics from across the globe. It was an
  incredibly ambitious project for anyone, let alone a 15-year-
  old.




196 RIG A SUPERSIMPLE RADIATION
DETECTOR




Fear fallout no more with a device that tells you
when radiation levels are high.

Radiation is all around us in small doses, and most of it isn’t
harmful for you—it’s really the ionizing, DNA-scrambling stuff that
we have to look out for. Enter this chamber–in-a-can, which lets
you see if an object’s radiation levels are off the charts.
MATERIALS
Aluminum can
Craft knife
NPN Darlington transistor
Electrical tape
Electrical wire
9-volt battery and snap
4.7k-ohm resistor
Soldering iron and solder
Aluminum foil
Rubber band
Multimeter

STEP 1 Make a hole in the can with a craft knife. Bend the
transistor’s base leg down into the can and tape it in place.

STEP 2 Use electrical wire to attach the transistor’s collector leg to
the negative pole of the battery snap. Keep the transitor’s leads
sticking up, away from the can.

STEP 3 Solder one lead of the resistor to the base of the can, near
the edge. Attach the other lead to the positive pole of the battery
snap with a piece of wire.

STEP 4 Tape the battery snap to the side of the can and hook the
battery up to the snap.

STEP 5 Cover the can’s open end with aluminum foil. Pull the foil
taut, then secure it with a rubber band.

STEP 6 Attach one probe of the multimeter to the transistor’s
emitter leg, and the other to the wire between the resistor and the
battery.

STEP 7 Turn on the multimeter. Allow the reading to stabilize—
avoid touching the can or moving around near it. Once it stabilizes,
you’ll have the baseline reading for the radiation in the room. Keep
the can away from power sources, which could confuse its
reading.

STEP 8 To measure the radioactivity of an object relative to the
baseline, simply place it beside the can’s end and observe the
changed reading on your multimeter.




197 SET UP A PLASMA GLOBE INSIDE A
SIMPLE LIGHTBULB
Make a miniature Tesla coil inside this
ubiquitous household fixture.

MATERIALS
Ferrite-core flyback transformer (salvaged from an old CRT television)
Wire strippers
Screwdriver
Hacksaw
18-gauge wire
22-gauge wire
Electrical tape
Rotary tool
Project box
60-watt or higher clear lightbulb
24-volt DC-power supply
On/off switch
Superglue
Electrical wire
Lightbulb socket
2N3055 transistor and heat sink
5-watt, 27k-ohm resistor
5-watt, 240k-ohm resistor
Soldering iron and solder

Decades ago, famous mad scientist Nikola Tesla invented what he
called the “inert gas discharge tube” to conduct various
experiments in electricity and magnetism.

These days, you can use the same technology to create an
entertaining display piece that generates static and responds to
your touch by arcing electricity to your fingertips. With a few
salvaged materials, you too can harness the power of high-
frequency alternating current—and be well on your way to
becoming a mad scientist yourself.

STEP 1 Salvage a transformer from an old CRT television. To do
this, turn off the television and unplug it, then open up its back and
locate the transformer. (It’s the bulky square metal ring with two
cylindrical “cores” on it, bolted into the television’s circuit board.)

STEP 2 Remove the transformer by clipping away the wires
(leaving extra wire on the transformer itself) and unscrewing the
bolts holding it to the circuit board.

STEP 3 There are two sets of windings on the transformer’s
primary and secondary core, both encased in plastic. Use a
hacksaw to cut through the plastic around the windings on the
smaller primary core. Then cut through and remove the windings.

STEP 4 Wind 18-gauge enameled wire around the spot where the
windings used to be about five times. Then wrap 22-gauge wire
four times next to the 18-gauge windings. Secure both wires with
electrical tape.

STEP 5 Use a rotary tool to make three holes in a project box: one
for your lightbulb socket, one for the power supply, and one for the
on/off switch. Super-glue these parts in place on the top and side
of the box, and place the transformer inside the box.

STEP 6 On the secondary core, there is another set of windings.
Pry the two loose ends off the core and twist them to the
connectors on the lightbulb socket.

STEP 7 Take one end of the 18-gauge wire wrapped around the
transformer and connect it to the transistor’s case post, and
connect the other end to the power switch.

STEP 8 Take one end of the 22-gauge wire and attach it to the
transistor’s base post. Attach the 22-gauge wire’s other end to a
wire between the 27k-ohm resistor and the 240k-ohm resistor.

STEP 9 Complete the rest of the circuit as shown below using
electrical wire, then screw your lightbulb into the socket, plug in
your power supply, and turn on the switch.
STEP 10 Kill the lights and watch your plasma globe glow.




    WARNING
    Tesla may have invented alternating current, but he sure
    didn’t like to see people get electrocuted with it. Avoid this
    fate by exercising extreme caution when handling the
    transformer, as its high voltage is immensely dangerous.




  A HOMEMADE SCANNING ELECTRON MICROSCOPE
  Ben Krasnow went looking for a challenge and decided to try
  his hand at the toughest one he could imagine: a homemade
  scanning electron microscope, fashioned from an old
  oscilloscope, a glass bell jar, and a refrigerator magnet to
  focus the electron beam. His completed microscope delivers
  about 50x magnification—a far cry from commercial SEMs’
  1,000x or more—but experts say that doesn’t lessen the
  accomplishment. William Beaty, a research engineer who had
  hoped to build the first DIY SEM, put it simply: “D’oh!”




198 ILLUMINATE SKETCHES WITH HOMEMADE
CONDUCTIVE INK
Write it, wire it up, and see it in lights.

MATERIALS
2.5 ml ammonium hydroxide
Two pipettes
Test tube
1 gram silver acetate
Centrifuge
0.2 ml formic acid
Syringe
Syringe filter
Glass vial
Glass to paint on
Thin paintbrush
9-volt battery
LEDs

STEP 1 Use a pipette to measure the ammonium hydroxide into a
test tube, then add the silver acetate. Place the tube in the
centrifuge; let it mix for 15 seconds.

STEP 2 Using a second pipette, transfer 0.2 ml formic acid into the
test tube solution one drop at a time, mixing it in the centrifuge
between each drop.

STEP 3 Set the test tube aside for 12 hours.

STEP 4 Pull the plunger out of the back of a syringe and add a
filter to the syringe, then decant the solution in the test tube into
the syringe.

STEP 5 Open the glass vial and place it under the syringe, then
place the plunger back into the syringe and force the liquid through
the filter and into the vial.

STEP 6 Using the liquid in the vial, draw or write something on
glass with a thin paintbrush, leaving gaps for the leads of the
power source and the LEDs.

STEP 7 Heat the glass in an oven set to 200°F (93°C). Wait 15
minutes, then remove it. It should have a conductive silver coating.

STEP 8 Once you’ve placed the battery and LEDs on the glass,
your circuit art will light right up.
199 HACK INFRARED GOGGLES
STEP 1 Unscrew the eyepieces from a pair of welding goggles.
Remove the dark green welding lenses, leaving just the clear
plastic.

STEP 2 Use a green welding lens as a template to cut out eight
circles of blue gel sheet and two circles of red gel sheet.

STEP 3 Add four blue gel sheet pieces to each eyepiece, screw
them back onto your goggles, and enjoy the crazy spectrum.

STEP 4 Add a red gel sheet piece for a different effect. Whatever
you do, just don’t look at the sun.
200 DECIMATE STUFF WITH A DIY LASER
CUTTER




It used to be lasers were just for scientists. Now
they’re for anyone who can harvest a few parts
from an old PC.

MATERIALS
Old computer with a DVD burner
Soldering iron and solder
Knife
Vise
Metal file
Pliers
Tweezers
AixiZ module
LM317 regulator
3k-ohm resistor
Wire strippers
Drill
Thermal glue
Laser safety goggles

STEP 1 Unplug the computer and open its case. Locate and
remove the power supply, heat sinks, and DVD burner.

STEP 2 Open the DVD burner, lift the circuit board, and remove
the sled underneath (the part with the laser diode).

STEP 3 To extract the laser diode from its heat sink, first load your
soldering iron with enough solder so it will make contact with both
of the diode’s soldered pins. Slide a knife under the diode’s ribbon,
and pull up on it as you touch the solder to the diode’s pins to
remove the ribbon.

STEP 4 Place the laser diode in a vise and file through its heat
sink. Once you’ve weakened the heat sink, hold it with pliers and
wedge a knife under the lip of the top. Use tweezers to extract the
diode from the heat sink.

STEP 5 Unscrew the AixiZ module (a laser housing unit) and
place the top facedown on your workspace. Drop the laser diode
in it with the laser facing down, carefully pressing it so the diode’s
back is flush with the module.

STEP 6 Attach two long leads to the diode’s negative and positive
pins and reattach the back of the AixiZ module, threading the
leads through the hole in its back.

STEP 7 Solder a 3k-ohm resistor across the LM317 regulator’s
adjustable and output voltage pins, then solder the laser diode’s
positive lead to the adjustable pin on the LM317 regulator.
STEP 8 Clip the wire connectors off the ends of the wires attached
to the power supply, then clip and strip the black and green wires
and solder them together.

STEP 9 Solder the diode’s negative lead to the power supply’s red
(negative) wire, and the power supply’s yellow (positive) wire to
the regulator’s input pin.

STEP 10 Drill a ½-inch (1.25-cm) hole through the large heat sink
that you harvested from your computer.

STEP 11 Slide the AixiZ module into the large heat sink, making
sure it doesn’t protrude. Secure with thermal glue.

STEP 12 Use thermal glue to attach the small heat sink to the
LM317 driver you wired.

STEP 13 Put on safety goggles that are specifically designed to
protect against lasers. Burn and cut things.




    WARNING
    Lasers are incredibly cool—and incredibly dangerous.
    Don’t point this at anyone (ever) or burn items likely to
    create harmful fumes. And, of course, always wear
    protective gear.
201 A 3D PRINTER THAT RUNS ON SUN AND
SAND
This bizarre-looking contraption turns the
desert’s resources—a whole lot of sun and
sand—into glass.

When design student Markus Kayser wanted to test his sun-
powered, sand-fed 3D printer, he knew the gray skies outside his
London apartment wouldn’t do. So he shipped the 200-pound (90-
kg) device to Cairo, Egypt, hoping to find plenty of sun and sand
that could, in conjunction with a large lens, produce glassware.
How does this machine work? Two aluminum arms, holding the
lens at one end and solar panels at the other, can pivot from
straight overhead down to a 45-degree angle to chase the sun.
Sensors detect the shadows and feed the data on their position to
Kayser’s computer, which directs the motorized frame to adjust to
properly align the lens. Two photovoltaic panels, one on either side
of the machine, keep the printer powered. Since the panels are
attached to the same arms as the lens, they also benefit from the
sun tracking, ensuring that they always get direct light.

Kayser first designs the object he wants to print in a computer-
assisted design (CAD) program. His computer sends instructions
to the printer, which works from the bottom up. After a layer has
cooled into glass, he adds more sand to the sandbox in the center
of the machine and flattens it out, and the printer begins heating
the next layer. Kayser’s first major piece, a bowl, took about four
and a half hours to print.




  PRINTING A BETTER BOWL
  Kayser has printed a glass bowl and several sculptures. He
  admits they’re not perfect; he says he could have used more
  complicated optics. But, he adds, perfection wasn’t the point:
  “This is about showing the potential.”
202 SHINE A MINI FLASHLIGHT
STEP 1 Connect two 3-volt batteries side by side with ¾-inch (1.9-
cm) electrical wire and tape.

STEP 2 Tape the LED’s leads loosely to the batteries, connecting
positive to positive and negative to negative terminals. STEP 3
Poke a hole in an SD-card case and insert the batteries with the
LED terminals.

STEP 4 Squeeze the case to make the LED’s leads press against
the battery and light up.




203 BRIGHTEN UP A STANDARD-ISSUE
FLASHLIGHT
Turn an average flashlight into something
much, much brighter.
MATERIALS
Small industrial flashlight
Rotary tool
Krypton bulb
Three lithium 3-volt batteries

STEP 1 Twist off the bottom of the flashlight canister. Remove and
discard the batteries.

STEP 2 Unscrew the top. Take out the factory-issue bulb and
recycle it or reserve it for another project.

STEP 3 Use a rotary tool to remove the ridges inside the battery
housing that hold the batteries in tightly.

STEP 4 Insert the krypton bulb and put the top of the flashlight
back in place.

STEP 5 Insert the 3-volt batteries into the case where the standard
batteries once were.

STEP 6 Close the flashlight and cast a brighter beam.
204 BEAM A BATMAN-STYLE SPOTLIGHT
Send up a tiny desktop signal whenever you’re
in need of big-time assistance.

MATERIALS
Large translucent flip-top bottle cap from a detergent or shampoo bottle
Craft knife
Aluminum foil
Scissors
Double-sided tape
USB laptop light
Wire cutters
Soldering iron and solder
Hot-glue gun
Clear plastic sheet
Cap from a sports bottle
Loose change
Foam board or cardboard
Black paint

STEP 1 Use a craft knife to cut off the top of the large flip-top
bottle cap; discard it. Wrap the bottle cap in strips of aluminum foil,
leaving small gaps between strips and adhering them with double-
sided tape.

STEP 2 Cut the USB plug off the USB laptop light using the wire
cutters; pull out the LED and its attached wires.

STEP 3 Flip the bottle cap over so that the exit hole is on the
bottom and the cap’s neck becomes the top. Crumple up
aluminum foil, form it into a rough bowl shape, and place it inside
the cap.

STEP 4 Punch a hole in the aluminum foil with a craft knife.
Thread the LED wires through it and out the exit hole of the large
cap, nestling the LED in the bowl shape.
STEP 5 Use a craft knife to make a slit in the covering of the USB
lamp’s detached USB plug, and peel the covering off. Then take
apart the metal case and solder the wires that once went to the
LED encased in the lamp back on to the LED’s relevant pins.

STEP 6 Use hot glue to secure the wires in place. Reattach the
metal case and then the rubber outer housing.

STEP 7 Cut a piece of plastic sheet to fit over the cap, with three
tabs around the edge to fit down into the bottle cap. Fold down the
tabs and apply glue to them, then press the plastic “lens” in place.

STEP 8 Cut a tiny logo out of aluminum foil and glue it onto the
lens.

STEP 9 Use the cap from a sports bottle to make the base. Glue a
couple of coins into the cap’s bottom to weight it.

STEP 10 Cut a support piece out of foam board or cardboard for
the spotlight to rest in. Be sure to make a slender bottom point that
will fit into the small hole in the sports-bottle-cap base. Paint the
base and support black.

STEP 11 Glue the foam support to the small sports-bottle-cap
base, then glue the spotlight to the support.

STEP 12 Send your signal.
205 REPURPOSE FOIL FOR TECHIE USE
Dig this stuff out of a kitchen cupboard and
make the most of its conductive properties.


 DO-IT-YOURSELF CAPACITORS
 Cut a 2-foot (60-cm) length of aluminum foil, and three lengths
 of plastic wrap to match. Cut the foil in half lengthwise and
 tape a piece of electrical wire to each sheet, then put the
 pieces of foil on top of each other with plastic wrap in
 between. Put more plastic wrap on top of and below the foil,
 then roll it all up and hook the wires to a battery charger.
 Charge stuff up.
  SECURE LOOSE BATTERIES
  Sometimes, batteries don’t quite connect with the springs
  inside your devices. So fold up a piece of aluminum foil and
  slide it between the battery terminals and the springs.

  CELL-PHONE–SIGNAL BLOCKER
  To stay under cover and prevent people from picking up your
  GPS coordinates, tightly wrap your phone in multiple layers of
  aluminum foil. To test it, try calling your phone. If it goes
  straight to voicemail, the signal to and from your phone is
  successfully blocked, and your coordinates are protected.

  DIY LIGHT REFLECTOR
  Wrap a large piece of cardboard in foil to create a quick and
  cheap light reflector for photography.




206 IMPROVISE A TRIPOD
STEP 1 Poke a hole in the center of the bottom of a plastic cup.

STEP 2 Insert a bolt that fits your camera’s threaded tripod hole.
Glue the bolt in place.

STEP 3 Screw on your camera and start snapping.
207 MOUNT A CAMERA TO YOUR BIKE
Document your epic rides with a bike-bell mod.

MATERIALS
Bicycle bell
Camera
Bicycle
Screwdriver

STEP 1 Find a bike bell with a central screw that fits the tripod
mount on the bottom of your camera. Most tripod mounts measure
¼ inch (6.35 mm).

STEP 2 Attach the bell to the handlebars.

STEP 3 Use a screwdriver to remove the bell’s dome.

STEP 4 Screw the camera’s tripod mount to the bell’s central
screw. Orient the camera whichever way you like, and start
shooting your photographic travelogue.
208 BUILD A TIME-LAPSE CAMERA STAND
Upgrade your kitchen timer for slick panoramic
photos on the cheap.

MATERIALS
Kitchen timer
Drill
¼-inch (6.35-mm) 20 set screw
⅜-inch (9.5-mm) bolt
⅜-inch (9.5-mm) 20 bushing
Craft knife
Rubber mat
Glue
Tripod
Tripod mount
Camera
Computer with photo-editing software

STEP 1 Drill a 15/64-inch (6-mm) hole into the center of a kitchen
timer’s dial. Insert a ¼-inch (6.35-mm) 20 set screw.

STEP 2 In the bottom of the timer, drill a hole 11/32 inches (8.75
mm) in diameter. Screw a ⅜-inch (9.5-mm) bolt into the hole to
create threads for a ⅜-inch (9.5-mm) bushing (a threaded insert
that will allow you to mount the timer to the tripod).

STEP 3 Measure and cut a piece of rubber mat, leaving a hole for
the bushing, and glue it to the bottom of the timer.

STEP 4 Mount the timer on a tripod, attach the tripod mount and
camera, and set the timer. Adjust the camera’s settings to take
pictures at regular intervals, and then transfer the shots to a
computer and create a panoramic time-lapse montage with photo
software.
209 RIG A PLASTIC-BOTTLE DIFFUSER
STEP 1 Cut out a small section of an empty frosted plastic water
jug.

STEP 2 Cut a hole in the section large enough for the camera’s
lens to fit through.

STEP 3 Place the diffuser on the camera so it covers the flash.
Snap away.
210 MAKE YOUR CAMERA WATERPROOF
STEP 1 Cut a piece of toilet-paper tube to match the depth of your
camera lens and cover your lens with it.

STEP 2 Stretch an unlubricated condom open. Add a packet of
desiccant gel—it will prevent moisture—and slide your camera
inside with the tube in place.

STEP 3 Tie the condom slack into a knot and superglue the knot
to make it watertight.
STEP 4 Stretch a second condom open and insert the wrapped
camera, knot side in. Tie and glue the knot again. Dive in and
document.




211 CREATE A PEEPHOLE FISHEYE LENS
STEP 1 Turn on your camera and extend the zoom as far as it will
go.

STEP 2 Grab a standard peephole from a home-supply store and,
making sure the peephole is facing the right way out, pop it over
the camera lens.

STEP 3 Hold it in place or attach it to the lens with heavy-duty
tape. (Look for tape that doesn’t leave a residue, which could
make your lens stick.)
212 ADAPT A MANUAL LENS TO YOUR DSLR
STEP 1 Procure a twist-on adapter ring and a compatible manual-
focus lens from a vintage film camera. (These options are both
way less expensive than the lenses you can buy for a DSLR, and
you can even find old macro, fisheye, and ultrazoom lenses
relatively inexpensively—just make sure they’re compatible with
your DSLR before purchasing.)

STEP 2 Insert the lens into the adapter. There is usually a dot or
some kind of marking on both the lens and the adapter that makes
it easy to see how the two fit together.

STEP 3 Twist the lens while holding the adapter in place, as if you
were mounting the lens onto a camera body. The lens should
make a click or locking sound when it’s secured.

STEP 4 Mount the lens and adapter combination onto your
camera like any other lens and get shooting.
213 Snap a Self-Portrait with a DIY Remote
Shutter Release
Trigger your camera’s shutter from afar with
basic household parts.

MATERIALS
Rotary tool
Pill bottle with snap-on lid
Craft knife
Rubber tubing that fits snugly over the nozzle of your squeeze bottle
Shutter release cable
Plastic squeeze bottle
Short piece of plastic tubing that fits snugly into the rubber tubing
Balloon
Thread
Talcum powder
Cork that fits into the pill bottle

STEP 1 Use a rotary tool to drill a hole into the pill bottle’s lid big
enough to fit the rubber tubing.

STEP 2 Drill a hole in the bottom of the pill bottle for the trigger of
your shutter release cable. Insert the trigger.

STEP 3 Use a craft knife to cut the rubber tubing long enough to
cover the longest distance that you anticipate being from the
camera. Insert the nozzle of your squeeze bottle into one end of
the rubber tubing.

STEP 4 Thread the tubing’s other end through the hole in the pill
bottle’s lid and onto the short plastic tubing.

STEP 5 Pull the balloon’s opening around the piece of plastic
tubing and tie it on securely with thread.
STEP 6 Dust the piece of cork with talcum powder and insert it
into the pill bottle. Lower the balloon into the bottle so that it rests
against the cork.

STEP 7 Test that everything is airtight, then hook the cable to your
camera and get in front of the camera, holding the squeeze bottle.
When you’re ready, squeeze the bottle, and the balloon will inflate,
pushing the cork against the cable’s trigger. Say “cheese,”
anyone?
214 SET UP A HIGH-SPEED AUDIO-TRIGGERED
FLASH




Light up superquick action with a superquick
audio-triggered flash.
MATERIALS
Disposable flash camera
Two AA and two AAA alkaline batteries
Voltage meter
Sensitive-gate, 400-volt, 0.8-amp silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR)
Wire strippers
Soldering iron and solder
3.5-mm stereo cable
Cassette recorder
Electret microphone
Camera capable of “B” (bulb) or prolonged exposures (at least two seconds)
Tripod

STEP 1 Remove the exterior plastic, film advance system, and
shutter assembly from the disposable flash camera. Make sure it
has fresh batteries.

STEP 2 Locate the camera’s flash terminals, located near where
the shutter was. Use a voltage meter to determine which terminal
is positive and which is negative.

STEP 3 Solder the cathode pin of the silicon-controlled rectifier to
the negative flash terminal and the anode pin to the positive flash
terminal.

STEP 4 Snip off one jack of the 3.5-mm stereo cable. Peel back its
plastic to expose the red, white, and ground wires.

STEP 5 Solder the stereo cable’s red and white wires to the
silicon-controlled rectifier’s gate pin and its ground wire to the
negative flash terminal (with the cathode pin).

STEP 6 Plug an inexpensive electret microphone into the tape
recorder’s mic input. Plug the jack of the 3.5-mm stereo cable into
the audio output.
STEP 7 Remove the tape recorder’s door and look for the
recorder’s write-protection button, a small movable “finger”
opposite the record head. Hold down this button and press the
recorder’s red record button to start charging the disposable
camera’s flash. When the amber ready light glows steadily, you
can start using it.

STEP 8 Find a dark area, mount your camera onto a tripod, and
set the shutter of the camera you’ll be shooting with for a bulb
exposure. (Cameras that can deliver timed 1- to 4-second
exposures can also work.)

STEP 9 Kill the lights, hold the flash trigger near your subject,
open the camera’s shutter, and record a high-speed event that is
accompanied by a noise—such as the pop of a water balloon or
the smack of a slap. Take your pick and take some pics.
215 A CAMERA THAT SHOOTS HUGE
PHOTOGRAPHS
This beast of a camera allows you to capture
huge images on X-ray film. Problem is, you’ll
have to build it first.
Darren Samuelson had just taken his last photo of Manhattan
when the police arrived. He and his father had been working from
an empty dock across the Hudson River, and the authorities
wanted to know what they were doing with a folding contraption
that was more than 6 feet (1.8 m) long and 70 pounds (32 kg)
pointed at the city. Samuelson pleaded that it was a camera, and
that he was just a tourist. They believed him and he got his shot—
a photo so detailed that the print could be blown up to half the
length of a volleyball court and still remain sharp.

Samuelson specially built this camera for X-ray stock that
measures 14 by 36 inches (35 cm by 90 cm) and is cheaper than
large-format photo paper. He began by constructing the massive
accordionlike bellows required to adjust the camera’s focal length
manually, spending two weeks on the floor folding, cutting, gluing,
and inserting the ribs that would give it form. The camera and
bellows unfold and slide out on rails, with a lens at one end and
the film holder at the other. To focus, he slides either end in or out.
The result is not point-and-shoot, Samuelson admits, and the build
wasn’t easy (the parts list runs to 186 rows on a spreadsheet).
“But when I hold up a print and see the amazing detail,” he says, “I
think, ‘Yeah, this was worth it.’”




  MEGA PRINTS
Each print measures 3 feet (90 cm), and while shooting
Samuelson drapes an immense black cloak over himself and
the camera to block out light.
216 RIDE WITH A GREASE-FREE PANT LEG
STEP 1 Dig up an old toe strap from a pair of retired bike pedals.
Apply a strip of adhesive reflective tape to the strap; it’ll keep you
safe during night rides.

STEP 2 Gather your chain-side pant leg, or roll it up to about mid-
calf.

STEP 3 Wrap the toe strap around your calf, thread the buckle, and
tighten. Adjust on the fly.
217 REINFORCE YOUR TIRE WITH A SEAT BELT
STEP 1 Head to the junkyard or second-hand store and find an old
seat belt.

STEP 2 Use scissors to cut off the buckle and latch plate.

STEP 3 Lay the belt inside your bicycle tire and cut it so that the
ends don’t overlap.
STEP 4 Insert your tire tube as you normally would and stretch the
tire back onto the rim, making sure the tube still fits well inside the
tire.




218 STAY SAFE WITH A BEER-VIEW MIRROR
STEP 1 Obtain a piece of mirror that fits into your bottle cap. (Or
use a glass cutter to score and punch out a small circle from a
larger mirror.)

STEP 2 Using a drill bit that matches the diameter of a bicycle
spoke, drill two holes in the rim of a bottle cap. The holes should be
directly opposite each other.

STEP 3 Thread the spoke onto the cap. Once the spoke is through
both sides of the cap, secure it by placing putty on the spoke’s end.

STEP 4 Squeeze some glue into the back of the bottle cap and set
the mirror down into it. Arrange the cap so the mirror will face you
when it’s installed on the helmet. Bend the cap and mirror on the
spoke about 90 degrees, then wait 24 hours for the glue to dry
completely.

STEP 5 Take a good look at your helmet to devise a proper
mounting method. If your helmet has holes, you’ll need to thread
the spoke through one of them and then use needle-nose pliers to
bend the spoke’s end into a loop, then secure one end of the loop
through the helmet’s hole. Other helmet styles will call for other
tactics—just make sure it’s mounted in a way that won’t poke you.

STEP 6 Hold the spoke in front of your helmet and determine how
much length you’ll need, given your mounting method and how far
you’d like it to extend in front of you. Cut it to this length.

STEP 7 Secure it to your helmet and ride safe.




219 KEEP YOUR HANDLEBAR GRIPS TIGHT
STEP 1 If your handlebars start to slip around, remove the rubber
grips. Wipe out the inside of the grips with a soft cloth.
STEP 2 Spray a few pumps of hair spray—the non-aerosol kind
works best—inside the grips.

STEP 3 While the hair spray is wet, slide the grips into place on
your handlebars.

STEP 4 Let the hair spray set overnight. Enjoy your no-budge
grips.




220 BRING THE PARTY WITH A BIKE SPEAKER
Everyone knows that bike rides are best when
they come with a soundtrack.

MATERIALS
Bike with a rear rack
10-inch (25-cm) speaker with cable
Marker
Four bolts with washers and nuts to fit
2-by-2-inch (5-by-5-cm) wood board
Waterproof plastic container
Drill
Small screws
Foam
Tripath-based amp
Bike-light mount
Media player with clip holder
Superglue

STEP 1 Set the speaker on your bike rack and mark places for four
holes on its underside for bolts.

STEP 2 Take the grille off the speaker and remove the woofer. Drill
the holes you marked and put the bolts in so that they stick out
from the speaker box’s bottom.

STEP 3 Cut the 2-by-2-inch (5-by-5-cm) board to the size of your
speaker’s bottom. Make two holes in each board for the bolts in the
speaker.

STEP 4 Put the woofer and the grille back into the speaker box,
and use the washers and nuts to bolt the speaker to the board on
the rack.
STEP 5 Screw the waterproof plastic container onto the speaker’s
top. Drill two holes in one side of the container and line its bottom
with foam. Place the amp inside.

STEP 6 Connect the speaker to the amp’s right channel with the
speaker cable, threading it through one of the holes in the
container’s side.

STEP 7 Attach the bike-light mount to your handlebar, and glue on
your media player’s clip holder. Slide your media player in.

STEP 8 Thread your media player’s cord through the second hole
in the plastic container’s side to connect it to the amp. Press play
and put the top on.

STEP 9 Watch parties erupt as you ride by.




221 STAY WARM ON CHILLY RIDES
STEP 1 Wad or fold newspaper to the length of your chest.

STEP 2 Insert the paper into your jacket and zip it up. Add more if
you want extra warmth.
STEP 3 Ride on in the cold.




222 MAKE A UNICYCLE OUT OF A BIKE
Turns out unis aren’t so tricky to make, but
they’re still just as tricky to ride.

MATERIALS
Old fixed-gear bicycle with a straight fork
Hacksaw
Metal file
Allen wrench
Steel pillow blocks
STEP 1 Remove the bicycle’s front fork. Use a hacksaw, if
necessary, to cut the frame where it’s attached to the fork. File the
edges of the cut pieces to smooth them.

STEP 2 Remove the handlebar and stem from the front fork using
the Allen wrench.

STEP 3 Remove the rear wheel and crank. To do this, take the
chain off the gears of the rear wheel and unfasten the bolts that
hold it to the frame.

STEP 4 Attach the front fork to the wheel axle by clamping the steel
pillow blocks on each side of the fork and attaching the blocks to
the axle at the spacers, using the bottom lock nut. Reattach the
crank and pedals.

STEP 5 Insert the seat post into the front fork and unicycle away.
(Just spare us the clown suit.)
223 NAVIGATE WITH AN OLD-FASHIONED GPS




Because the best bike adventures lack cell
reception.

MATERIALS
Bicycle
Sturdy plastic mesh
Scissors
Large zip-top storage bag
Two Velcro strips 6 inches (15 cm) in length
Velcro strip 5 inches (12.5 cm) in length
Map

STEP 1 Cut the plastic mesh so that when you slide it inside the
storage bag it lies flat.

STEP 2 Remove the mesh and make four slits in it just large
enough for the Velcro strips to fit through. Two horizontal slits go in
the upper corners; two vertical slits go in the center (where your
bike’s top tube is).

STEP 3 Slip the mesh inside the bag and adjust it so that it butts up
against the zipper. Mark the location of the top slits on the back and
front of the bag. Mark the location of the center strips on the back
of the bag only.
STEP 4 Remove the mesh from the bag. Cut slits along the bag’s
markings.

STEP 5 Pass the Velcro strips through the slits in the bag. Wrap
the 6-inch (15-cm) strips around the handlebars and the 5-inch
(12.5-cm) strip around the top tube, and fasten them into loops.
Insert the mesh back into the bag.

STEP 6 Open the bag and slide a printout of your route inside it.

STEP 7 Start riding, referring to your map when needed.




224 MAKE YOUR BIKE’S TIRES SNOW PROOF
Brave the winter with DIY snow chains for your
bike.

STEP 1 Make sure your bike has a coaster brake, a disc brake, or,
if it’s a fixed gear, no brake. (This particular trick won’t work with rim
brakes.)
STEP 2 Gather two zip ties for each spoke gap on both of your
bicycle’s tires.

STEP 3 Wrap a zip tie around the tire and rim, positioning the zip
tie’s head halfway between the outside of the tire and the rim.
Fasten it shut.

STEP 4 Continue placing zip ties in the spoke gaps, alternating the
side on which the head faces and leaving enough clearance
between the zip ties and your fenders.

STEP 5 Trim the end of each zip tie just to the head. Ride off into
the slush.
225 PROTECT YOUR BIKE SADDLE FROM
THEFT
Deter bike saddle thieves with simple,
persuasive inconvenience.

STEP 1 Making sure your seat post is at maximum height, measure
a length of chain long enough to wrap through the saddle rails and
seat stays.

STEP 2 Break the chain at your measured loop length and cut a
used inner tube to the length of the chain.

STEP 3 Drop the chain through the inner tube.

STEP 4 Thread the chain between your saddle’s seat rails and seat
stays, then use a chain tool to rejoin the chain.

STEP 5 Never ride home without a saddle again.
226 REUSE A BUSTED BIKE TUBE
A flat tire can really ruin your day. Get revenge
on it with these simple reuse ideas.


 SUPER-SIZE RUBBER BANDS
 Cut them into long strips and use them to secure all sorts of
 things. You can also make a really big rubber-band ball, or
 shoot them into the sky. (If you shoot them at people, you
 didn’t get this idea here!)

 GET A GRIP
 Wrap a tube around the handle of common household tools
 (such as screwdrivers, brooms, rakes, and hammers) to
 improve your grip.

 KEEP PAINT LOOKING SPIFFY
 Protect the paint on vulnerable areas of your bicycle—such as
 where your lock rubs against the frame—by wrapping inner
 tubes around those areas.

 EMERGENCY HEADLIGHT
 If your bike light dies and you’ve got a flashlight handy, fish a
 spare inner tube out of your bag. Cut a piece that is 2 inches (5
 cm) longer than your flashlight, then make a hole near each of
 the tube’s ends. Run the tube under your handlebar so that it is
 perpendicular to the bar, and thread the flashlight through the
 holes with the light pointing forward. Turn it on and go.
BUNGEE CORDS IN A PINCH
Cut a sliver of inner tube and use it as a zip tie or bungee cord
to lash whatever’s loose.
227 SHRED ON A FAN-PROPELLED
SKATEBOARD




Why cruise on a regular skateboard when you
can blast by on this model?
Fast is cool, but few would disagree that faster is even better. This
skateboard build has you adding the engine, propeller, and remote-
control transmitter from a model airplane (which you can pick up as
independent parts in a hobby shop, or salvage from a spare model
plane near you) for a version that’d make even Marty McFly
jealous.

MATERIALS
4½ feet (1.35 m) of 1-by-10-inch (2.5-by-25-cm) wood
Jigsaw
Sandpaper
Drill
Adhesive-backed skateboard grip tape
Skateboard trucks and risers with wheels
Screws and washers
Remote-control transmitter with bundled receiver and servo
Wire
Battery for transmitter
OS 1.60 FX model airplane engine
950-cc gas tank and gas
Hose clamp
Fan cage
Three-blade propeller
Standard glow starter with meter
12-volt starter motor

STEP 1 Blow the template at right up to size so it’s about 4½ feet
(1.35 m) in length and trace it onto your piece of wood. Use a
jigsaw to cut out the board, and sand the edges so they’re splinter-
free. Drill holes so you can mount the trucks and risers.

STEP 2 Cut out and sand the two pieces from the remaining wood
that will serve as mounting planks for the fan, gas tank, and engine,
as well as create a compartment for the electronics. Make the
mounting planks tall enough so that they’ll provide clearance for
your fan model’s cage, keeping it off the ground and the skateboard
bottom.
STEP 3 Apply adhesive-backed grip tape in your desired colors to
the board and mounting compartment pieces.

STEP 4 Screw the trucks and risers to the board using the
predrilled holes.

STEP 5 Screw the two mounting planks securely into the back end
of the board from the underside, after predrilling holes for them with
a smaller bit. Cut another piece of scrap wood the width of the
space between the mounting planks. Screw it in between the
planks near their tops as a roof for the compartment that will house
the electronics.

STEP 6 Wrap a short piece of wire around the servo’s horn (the
part where the arm screws on), and wrap the other end around the
engine’s throttle lever.

STEP 7 Plug the servo’s connector into the receiver, then hook the
battery to the receiver. Next mount the engine above the
electronics compartment, screwing through the engine mount holes
into the tops of the mounting planks. Secure the servo, receiver,
and battery inside.

STEP 8 Screw a hose clamp to the outside of the mounting planks,
then tighten the hose clamp around the gas tank to mount it.
Connect the gas tank to the engine.

STEP 9 Unscrew the cage from a fan and insert the propeller. Slide
the propeller onto the engine, tightening the propeller’s bolt, then
secure the cage onto the electronics compartment’s roof with
screws and washers.

STEP 10 Plug the glow starter into the engine’s glow plug and use
the starter motor to rotate the propeller. Once it’s started up, set
aside the starter motor, remove the glow plug, and give the remote
to someone you trust. Zoom off.
A MOTORIZED SKATEBOARD
If you ever see a grown man whizzing by on a skateboard
doing 20 miles per hour (32 km/h), that would be John Carnett,
and in case you don’t get a good look, his ride is a souped-up,
motorized board he built from the ground up. He wanted to
create a skateboard that would be superior to commercial
models—a fast, hot-looking board that ran on all terrains. He
cut an aluminum deck and bent the ends and side rails, then
he outfitted it with axles and 8-inch (20-cm) knobby tires. Then
there was the matter of installing a disc-braking system and a
500-watt electric motor. It’s the sweetest ride on the road—or
off it.
228 GIVE YOUR MOTORCYLE A FUTURISTIC
VIBE




Ride straight out of the movie TRON with this
illuminated motorcycle trick.

MATERIALS
Motorcycle
Flexible LED light strips
Heavy-duty tape
Wire strippers
Two clamp connectors
Soldering iron and solder
18-gauge black wire
18-gauge red wire
Zip ties
On/off switch

STEP 1 Locate your motorcycle’s battery—it’s probably under the
seat.

STEP 2 Place the LED strips where you want them along your
motorcycle’s frame. If the strips themselves are not adhesive,
secure them with tape, and run the wires through the frame body
toward the battery.

STEP 3 Using the wire strippers, strip some of the insulation from
the ends of all the LED strips’ wires. Place the negative wires into a
clamp connector and the positive wires into another clamp
connector.

STEP 4 Solder the black 18-gauge wire to the clamp housing the
black LED wires, and the red 18-gauge wire to the clamp housing
the red wires.

STEP 5 Gather the wires and secure them with a zip tie.

STEP 6 Mount the on/off switch somewhere you can easily reach
while you’re riding. Strip the ends of the black and red 18-gauge
wires. Connect the red 18-gauge wire to the on/off switch, soldering
on another length of 18-gauge red wire to extend to the battery.

STEP 7 Connect the black 18-gauge wire to the battery’s negative
terminal and the red 18-gauge wire to the battery’s positive
terminal.

STEP 8 Start your motorcycle, flip the switch into the “on” position,
and make sure all the LED strips light up—if they don’t, check your
connections.

STEP 9 Suit up and ride off into an alternate reality.
229 LIGHT UP YOUR MOTORCYCLE HELMET
Make your helmet extra safe—and extra cool,
too—with conductive paint.

MATERIALS
Motorcycle helmet
Fine sandpaper
Paper towel
Pencil
Masking tape
Conductive paint
Paintbrush
Wire strippers
Electrical wire
Soldering iron and solder
9-volt battery
9-volt battery snap
On/off switch
Epoxy
Wooden sticks for mixing and applying epoxies
LEDs
Conductive epoxy
Clear spray enamel

STEP 1 Sand the surface of your helmet where your design will go
and then wipe it with a damp paper towel.

STEP 2 Draw a circuit directly onto the helmet. Trace components
(such as the LEDs, battery, and on/off switch) onto the helmet and
mark positives and negatives.

STEP 3 Mask out the area around your circuit to contain the
conductive paint.

STEP 4 Paint inside the tape, mapping your circuit. Make sure to
stir the paint thoroughly and often, as the particles tend to settle.
Apply multiple coats, if needed.

STEP 5 Let the paint dry for a few minutes and carefully remove
the masking tape. Then let dry for 24 hours.

STEP 6 Snap the battery snap onto the 9-volt battery.Strip the ends
of two pieces of wire and solder positive and negative leads to the
snap’s positive and negative ports. Then solder these leads to the
positive and negative terminals of your on/off switch.

STEP 7 Use wooden sticks to mix and apply epoxy, then affix the
on/off switch and battery to the helmet. Let dry.

STEP 8 Trim the leads of the LEDs. Use conductive epoxy to
attach the LEDs where you want them, and then affix the switch
wires.

STEP 9 Let dry for 24 hours, then seal over and around the
conductive paint with epoxy to waterproof.

STEP 10 Tape off areas of your helmet you want to protect—like
fabric parts or LED bulbs—and spray your helmet with clear spray
enamel.

STEP 11 To turn the lights on, flip the on/off switch.
230 THE VROOMING HOT-ROD HAULER
An old logging truck is transformed into a sleek
street racer.

Randy Grubb couldn’t get it off his mind. For years he had been
driving past an old logger’s place near his home in rural Oregon,
and one of the long-haul trucks in the man’s yard kept catching his
attention. In late 2008, Grubb finally stopped for a closer look, and
the toothless, cigar-chomping trucker let him rev the engine. He
was sold, but he had a big change in mind: He was going to
transform it into a hot rod.

The 49-year-old Grubb had built a number of other vehicles out of
forgotten engines in his backyard shop. But making a dragster out
of this ancient truck—a 1965 Peterbilt Model 351 with a giant 12-
cylinder, two-stroke diesel engine—was unlike any of his past jobs.
The engine hadn’t been used in a decade, so he found a diesel
mechanic to help him tune it up, replaced the original 13-speed
transmission with a four-speed automatic normally used in
Greyhound buses, installed new fuel lines, and then polished every
cubic inch. Next came the body. He shortened the truck’s grille by
10.5 inches (26.25 cm), took the front and rear axles from another
truck and narrowed them to hot-rod scale, and machined and
welded all the connective hardware to complete the transformation.

Grubb refers to the car—dubbed Piss’d Off Pete because it’s a
Peterbilt with attitude—as an aluminum sculpture. In fact, the
vehicle will most likely soon be in a private collection. But he hardly
treats it like a museum piece. As soon as he was finished, he drag-
raced it at more than 100 miles an hour (160 km/h).




  OFF THE SCRAP HEAP
  Piss’d Off Pete runs on a 12-cylinder engine Grubb calls “the
  biggest, baddest diesel ever made.” Just how much did making
  it cost him? $100,000.
231 MOUNT A RAD HOOD ORNAMENT
STEP 1 Use epoxy to glue a plastic figurine of your choosing to a
circular magnet with a center bore.

STEP 2 If your car has a hood ornament, remove it. Thread a
screw through the magnet of your new one and turn to secure the
screw to the ornament.
STEP 3 Screw it onto your car’s hood in the old ornament’s hole, or
just use the magnet to hold it in place.




232 HANG A DIY AIR FRESHENER
STEP 1 Cut out a T-shirt image you like and trace it onto a sheet of
fabric softener and a piece of fabric.
STEP 2 Staple the dryer sheet in between the two pieces of fabric.

STEP 3 Punch a hole in the top and insert a rubber band; knot the
band to secure it.

STEP 4 Hang it up in your car to cover up stink.




233 BLACK OUT YOUR TAILLIGHTS
STEP 1 Remove your taillight lenses by unscrewing the bolts
holding them onto the car.

STEP 2 Clean them, and then cover the lights entirely with strips of
masking tape, pressing the strips into the grooves with a pen.
STEP 3 Draw your design onto the masking tape.

STEP 4 Cut out your design by tracing your drawing with a razor
blade or a craft knife. Remove the excess tape.

STEP 5 Put tape around the light’s edges.

STEP 6 Lightly sand the unmasked surfaces.

STEP 7 Spray the taillight with black paint in quick passes. Do two
to three coats, allowing them to dry in between.

STEP 8 Apply a coat of clear spraypaint. Gently remove the tape.

STEP 9 Reinstall your badder-than-before taillights and hit the
streets (after investigating how your local law enforcement will feel
about them).
234 INSTALL AIR HORNS IN YOUR CAR
STEP 1 Open up your hood and detach the battery’s negative
terminal with a wrench.

STEP 2 Locate the factory-issued horn at the front of the engine
and disconnect the power harness from it, starting with the ground
wire. (The power harness is the bundle of wires that keeps the horn
juiced, and it will power your new horn and air compressor.)

STEP 3 Remove the old horn from the mount. Using the brackets
that came with your air horn kit, mount your new horns in the same
place as the factory-issued horn. Aim the new horns slightly
downward.

STEP 4 Find a clear spot under the hood and along the firewall (the
sheet metal that separates the engine from the passenger section).
Mount the air compressor here using the mounting bolts that came
with the kit.

STEP 5 Connect the wiring harness’s hot wire and the air
compressor’s hot wire to a relay.

STEP 6 Ground the relay’s ground wire to a bolt, then connect the
relay’s hot wire to the car battery.

STEP 7 Run a tube from the compressor to the horns.

STEP 8 Reconnect the negative terminal to complete the circuit.
Let those bad boys blast.
235 FEND OFF FENDER BENDERS WITH A
SONIC DISTANCE SENSOR




Back up with confidence thanks to a device that
beeps when you’re about to crash.

MATERIALS
Ping ultrasonic distance sensor
Electrical wire
Arduino Uno
Buzzer
Epoxy

STEP 1 Wire the Ping sensor to your Arduino according to the
circuitry diagram.

STEP 2 To hook up the buzzer, wire its positive end to the
Arduino’s pin 8, and the negative end to a ground pin.

STEP 3 Load up the Arduino code for the Ping sensor, which you
can find at www.popsci.com/thebigbookofhacks.

STEP 4 Mount the sensor on the back of your car with epoxy,
running the wires through the trunk to the inside of the car.

STEP 5 Mount the buzzer with epoxy somewhere inside the car
where you’ll be able to hear it.

STEP 6 When the sensor comes within 1 foot (30 cm) of an
obstacle, the buzzer will sound to warn you. You may now parallel
park without fear.
236 HACK AN EMERGENCY USB CHARGER
On the lam without your car charger? Splice
some wires and be on your way.

MATERIALS
USB cable for your device
Knife
Any 5-volt car cigarette lighter adapter
Tape

STEP 1 Cut the USB end off the cable for your device and strip the
insulation. You’ll use the black and red wires to connect to the
adapter. Twist together the other two wires.

STEP 2 Cut off the end of the cigarette lighter adapter that does not
plug into the cigarette lighter. Use the knife to strip the insulation to
reveal the black and red wires.

STEP 3 Twist the two red wires together and the two black wires
together. Wrap tape around the joints to insulate them.

STEP 4 Plug it in and charge up your phone in the car.




237 SHIFT WITH A CUSTOM GEAR KNOB
STEP 1 Pry off your old shift knob. Measure the size of the knob’s
mount.

STEP 2 Choose an object to use as a new shift knob (resin, wood,
and plastic work well).

STEP 3 Drill a hole in the object’s bottom to fit the knob mount.

STEP 4 Glue your new knob onto your shifter using epoxy. Upshift
in style.
238 BUILD A BED IN YOUR VAN




Get on the road again with a mod that makes
your van at least as comfy as that Best Western.

MATERIALS
Sweet van
Tape measure
Paper and pencil
Storage bins, if desired
Two sheets of 1 ¼ -inch (3-cm) plywood
2x4s
Wood screws
Screwdriver
Jigsaw
Mattress

STEP 1 Measure the space you have available in the back of your
van, accounting for any obstructions, such as wheel wells. You may
want to remove the last row of seats to provide more space.

STEP 2 Make a plan for a bed frame based on your van’s
measurements, and include a flat bottom, two risers that lift the bed
off the van floor, and a flat top. If you want to use the space under
the bed for storage, figure storage bins into your plan.

STEP 3 Construct your risers. Lay out a long 2x4 and attach four
shorter 2x4s perpendicular to it, spaced evenly along it. Reinforce
the riser by doubling up your 2x4s as necessary. Repeat to build a
second riser. (Use screws instead of nails if you want to be able to
deconstruct and remove the bed easily.)

STEP 4 Use a jigsaw to customize the bottom of the bed, cutting
out holes for any brackets or wheel wells that would keep the
bottom from sitting flat in your van.

STEP 5 Attach the two risers to the sheet of plywood that will serve
as the bed’s bottom, then slide the bottom into your van. You may
need to tilt it to get it inside.

STEP 6 Attach evenly spaced crosspieces to the risers.

STEP 7 Use a jigsaw to trim the top of the bed to avoid
obstructions as needed, then screw it to the crosspieces.

STEP 8 Add a mattress or other padding and slide your storage
bins underneath the bed.
239 RIG A CAMPING SHOWER
MATERIALS
Hose
12-volt output pump
Two PVC elbows
Small-diameter PVC pipe
Showerhead
12-volt car lighter
Bucket of water

STEP 1 Attach a small piece of hose to the outlet on a 12-volt
output pump.
STEP 2 Add a PVC elbow fitting to the hose, and connect a length
of small-diameter PVC pipe. Run the pipe to another elbow, then
screw a showerhead to the second elbow’s end.

STEP 3 Wire the pump to a 12-volt car lighter plug, and drop the
pump in a bucket of water.

STEP 4 Hang up your shower to a tree near you, securing it
however you see fit. Enjoy showering outdoors.
240 KIT OUT A SOLAR-CHARGING MESSENGER
BAG




Mod a basic bag and charge your gadgets with
the sun’s rays.

MATERIALS
Messenger bag
Scissors
Grommeting kit
Clear vinyl sheeting
Superglue
Photovoltaic panel
78M05 voltage regulator
Project box
0.47F 50-volt electrolytic capacitor
0.1F 50-volt tantalum capacitor
Electrical wire
Soldering iron and solder
USB cable with female connector
Digital multimeter
A device to charge that connects to the USB cable

STEP 1 Use the grommeting kit to punch holes in your bag. (These
holes are for the wires connecting the photovoltaic panel to the
voltage regulator and your device.) Reinforce the holes with
grommets.

STEP 2 Use clear vinyl sheeting to create a pocket for the
photovoltaic panel. Glue it in place over the grommets so it’s on the
bag’s outside.
STEP 3 Mount the voltage regulator inside your project box, then
follow the circuitry diagram to hook up the capacitors and voltage
regulator. Solder these connections.

STEP 4 Snip off the male connector from the USB cable. Open the
cable end and separate the four wires: red, black, green, and white.
Connect the red wire to the output lead of the 78M05 voltage
regulator and the black wire to the voltage regulator’s ground lead.

STEP 5 With the photovoltaic panel in the clear pocket, connect its
positive terminal to the input lead of the voltage regulator. Connect
its negative terminal to the voltage regulator’s ground lead,
threading the wires through the holes in the bag.

STEP 6 Place the photovoltaic panel in direct sunlight and test the
voltage readings with a digital multimeter at four points: the
photovoltaic panel terminals, the voltage regulator input, the
voltage regulator output, and the USB pin 1 + 4. The readings at
the first two points should both be approximately 7 to 8 volts. The
readings at the last two points should be exactly 5.15 volts.

STEP 7 If everything checks out, hook up a suitable device and
charge out there.




241 STAY COOL ON THE GO WITH AD HOC A/C
If you’re camping, you’ve already got a cooler.
Hook up a fan to feel the breeze.

MATERIALS
Styrofoam cooler
Saw
Ice
Portable fan

STEP 1 Cut a hole in the lid of the cooler; it should be as large as
the fan’s face.

STEP 2 Cut holes in the side of the cooler. They should face in the
general direction in which you’d like the cool air to blow.

STEP 3 Add ice to the cooler and replace the lid.

STEP 4 Place the fan facedown over the hole in the lid, and turn it
on.

STEP 5 Pull up a chair and swelter no more.




242 REFILL A TINY TOOTHPASTE TUBE
STEP 1 Detach the tops of two toothpaste tubes and place them
together with their closed ends touching.

STEP 2 Use a ring of Sugru to attach the closed ends. Wait 24
hours for it to dry.

STEP 3 Drill a hole through the center of the attached tops. Brush
out any shards of plastic.

STEP 4 Attach a full large tube of toothpaste to one side, and an
empty travel-size tube to the other. Squeeze to refill.




243 ASSEMBLE A COLLAPSIBLE TRAVEL
HANGER
Because wrinkled clothes are for suckers, but
so are hanging bags.

MATERIALS
Wire hanger
Wire cutters
3 feet (90 cm) of ½-inch (1.25-cm) PVC
4 feet (1.2 m) of rope
Pliers

STEP 1 Measure the length of each side of a wire hanger. Cut
three sections of PVC pipe, sized to match those measurements.

STEP 2 Cut the hook off the wire hanger, slicing about 1 inch (2.5
cm) below the twisted base of the hook on either side. Use pliers to
bend the two ends up at the base.

STEP 3 Line up the PVC sections so they match the layout of the
original hanger, then thread the rope through all three sections,
leaving enough slack so that the hanger will be able to collapse—
about 6 inches (15 cm). Tie a knot in the rope.

STEP 4 Thread the base of the hook through the rope at the top of
the hanger, using pliers to close the upturned ends around the
rope.

STEP 5 To collapse the completed hanger, just fold it up—if it
doesn’t fold, use a longer piece of rope.
244 GIVE YOUR SUITCASE THE GIFT OF
WHEELS
Forget lugging that luggage—upgrade it and let
it roll itself to the terminal.

MATERIALS
Metal plate
Four casters
Suitcase
Marker
Drill
Grommet kit
Nuts and bolts
Rubber washers

STEP 1 Choose a metal plate that fits the side of the suitcase
you’re modifying. Decide where you’d like the casters to go, then
line up the tops of the casters on your metal plate and mark their
positions. Also mark a few sets of holes along each edge of the
plate—you’ll use these to secure the plate to your bag.

STEP 2 Drill your marks, using a drill bit that matches the size of
your bolts.

STEP 3 Place the drilled metal plate in its final position on your
suitcase. Use a pen to mark the position of each hole.

STEP 4 Using a grommet kit, punch a hole through your suitcase at
each point you marked. Place a grommet on either side of each
hole, then hammer the two pieces together using the equipment in
your kit. Repeat until you’ve protected each hole with a grommet.

STEP 5 Line up the plate again, and use nuts and bolts to connect
the plate to the bag. Then connect the casters—the bolts for these
should run through the plate and into the bag. To add extra
weatherproofing, use rubber washers on the inside of all bolts.
245 PACK YOUR RAZOR SAFELY
No more reaching into your toiletries bag and
coming out with a bloody fingertip.

MATERIALS
Binder clip
Razor
Rubber band

STEP 1 Fold back the binder clip’s arms and open it.

STEP 2 Insert the head of your razor and close the clip, folding
down the arms. Use a rubber band to secure the binder clip in
place over the razor.

STEP 3 Pack your razor without fear of cutting yourself when you
unpack.
246 TAKE AERIAL PHOTOS WITH A WEATHER
BALLOON
Keep your drone envy in check with a rig that
snaps shots from the sky.

MATERIALS
Digital camera
3,500 feet (1,070 m) of heavy-duty nylon string
Gaffers tape
Large plastic bottle
Box cutter
Weather balloon
Helium
Rubber band

STEP 1 Choose a camera with a large SD card (at least 4 GB) and
a continuous setting.

STEP 2 Make a 3-foot (90-cm) loop of string, wrap it around your
camera, and knot it securely against the camera body, with the
excess creating another loop.

STEP 3 Secure the string around your camera with gaffers tape.
When you dangle it by the loop, your camera should be supported
on either side of the lens. (Don’t skimp on tape and buy the cheap
stuff, or you’ll pay for it later.)

STEP 4 Cut a large plastic bottle in half. Put the camera inside the
top half of the bottle, lens facing down, with the loop of string
sticking out through the neck of the bottle.

STEP 5 Cut out two 8-by-2½-inch (20-by-6.25-cm) plastic strips
from the plastic bottle’s bottom half. Tape them to the top half of the
bottle. (They’ll help stabilize the camera during flight.)
STEP 6 Inflate the weather balloon with helium, close it up, and tie
the string to the balloon’s opening. (If you don’t have an especially
large balloon, you can make your own by taping two Mylar sleeping
bags together and inflating them, then taping them together.)

STEP 7 Attach the camera in its protective cover just below the
balloon using the loop of string that’s secured to the camera. Tie
the 3,500-foot (1,070-m) string to the balloon as well. The weather
balloon should lift the camera easily.

STEP 8 Set your camera to continuous mode and use a rubber
band to hold down the camera’s trigger. Allow the balloon to rise
quickly, letting out the string carefully to avoid tangles.

STEP 9 Head in the direction of the area you’d like to document
from above. Avoid trees and other structures that could tangle your
string. When you’re done, just pull the balloon back in by its string.

STEP 10 Use digital photo-stitching software to create huge,
detailed maps of your ‘hood.




247 MAKE A MINI HOVERCRAFT
STEP 1 Remove the push-up cap from any sports-drink bottle.
STEP 2 Glue the bottle cap to the top of a CD. Make sure the valve
can still open and shut.

STEP 3 Glue a balloon to the cap. Blow it up from underneath, and
watch it soar above the floor.




248 LAUNCH A MINI ROCKET
Combine simple household items to make a
rocket propulsion system.

MATERIALS
Paper
Pencil
Scissors
Glue
Alka-Seltzer tablets
Water
Empty film canister

STEP 1 Design your rocket, drawing it on paper. A simple cylinder,
nose cone, and a pair of fins will suffice. It should stand around 6
inches (15 cm) tall and be approximately 1 ½ inches (3.75 cm) in
diameter.

STEP 2 Cut out your rocket components (cylinder, nose cone, and
fins) and glue them together.

STEP 3 Open the film canister and drop one-half of an Alka-Seltzer
tablet into it.

STEP 4 Fill the canister half full of water and snap the canister cap
into place. Slide the rocket over the cap, place the assembly cap-
down, and get back. Watch the rocket blast off.
249 Build a Better Canoe Paddle
Because tech geeks can be wilderness geeks,
too.

MATERIALS
¾-by-20-by-8-inch (1.9-by-50-by-20-cm) piece of wood board
Keyhole saw
Wood glue
Two rectangular wooden strips, 5 feet (1.5 m) long and ¾ by 1 ¼ inch (1.9 by 3
   cm) thick
Rubber bands
Block plane
Sandpaper
Wood finish
Steel wool

STEP 1 Make the paddle blades by cutting the wood board
diagonally lengthwise, then remove a triangle with a 1-inch (2.5-cm)
base from a corner of each board as shown below. Reserve these
for later use.

STEP 2 Use wood glue to connect the two wood strips together,
forming the shaft. Hold the strips together with rubber bands and let
them dry.

STEP 3 Glue the two paddle halves to the shaft as shown, aligning
them carefully. Glue the two triangles in place as the handle grips.
Again, hold these parts in place with rubber bands while the glue
dries.

STEP 4 Once all the glue is dry, remove the rubber bands. Use the
keyhole saw to trim around the blade, contouring its shape as
desired.

STEP 5 Use the block plane to contour the center of each blade
half for a slightly concave paddle blade, and to shape the shaft and
handle.
STEP 6 To round the shaft, hold the grip end in one hand. Slowly
rotate the paddle so that the block plane shapes it uniformly on all
sides.

STEP 7 Sand the paddle to smooth it and apply wood finish. Let
this coat dry before smoothing with steel wool and applying
additional coats.

STEP 8 After that last coat of varnish has dried, hit the river or lake
and paddle off into the sunset.
250 UPGRADE YOUR KAYAK INTO A SAILBOAT




Pull that old kayak out of the garage and set it
sailing.

MATERIALS
Aluminum sheeting 1-inch (2.5-cm) PVC pipe
Epoxy
1¼-inch (3-cm) PVC pipe
Drill
Polyethylene kayak
1¼-inch (3-cm) polyethylene irrigation pipe
Plastic welder
Scrap polyethylene plastic
Nylon rope
Boat tarp
Grommeting kit
PVC elbow
Two three-way connectors
Dock ties

STEP 1 Cut the aluminum sheeting to create a rudder and
centerboard. The centerboard should be a 1-by-1-foot (30-by-30-
cm) square, and the rudder should be about 1 foot (30 cm) in
length and 6 inches (15 cm) in height.
STEP 2 Attach the centerboard to a length of 1-inch (2.5-cm) PVC
pipe using epoxy.

STEP 3 Make a hole in the kayak’s floor immediately in front of the
seat. The hole should be large enough for the 1-inch (2.5-cm) pipe.
Insert the centerboard pipe into this hole from the bottom, then use
a plastic welder and scrap polyethylene to secure the pipe to the
kayak’s floor.

STEP 4 For the rudder mount, use a section of 1 ¼-inch (3-cm)
polyethylene pipe that’s cut to approximately the same height as
the tail end of your kayak. Weld the rudder mount onto the kayak’s
back.

STEP 5 Cut a piece of 1-inch (2.5-cm) PVC pipe so it’s a little
longer than the rudder mount. Epoxy the aluminum rudder to this
pipe and slide it through the rudder mount.

STEP 6 Cap off the rudder pipe with a PVC elbow, then attach a 1-
inch (2.5-cm) pipe to the rudder pipe. Drill a hole in the end of this
pipe.

STEP 7 Cut two short pieces of polyethylene pipe to use as rudder
control handles and make holes in them. Thread a long piece of
rope through the handles and through the hole in the pipe attached
to the rudder.

STEP 8 For the sail, cut three long pieces of 1-inch (2.5-cm) PVC
pipe to the size of your boat tarp and attach them together in a U
shape with three-way connectors. Use the grommeting kit to make
grommets down the tarp’s edges. Attach the sail to the pipes by
stringing rope through the grommets and around the pipe frame.
Leave a piece of pipe extending that will fit into the mast base.

STEP 9 For the mast base, weld a piece of 1¼-inch (3-cm) PVC
pipe to the floor of the kayak with scrap polyethylene. To secure the
mast farther up, weld both ends of a half-ring shape that fits the
1¼-inch (3-cm) pipe to the inside front of the kayak. Fit the mast
into the base.

STEP 10 Attach lengths of rope to the sail and secure the ropes to
the kayak with dock ties. Sail away.




251 THE INCREDIBLE AMPHIBIOUS TANK
Half boat, half car, all adventure.
Avid hunter Stan Hewitt wanted to tackle the prime duck habitat of
the Alaskan tundra, an area hard to access using regular vehicles.
He knew he needed a tank to do it—one with speed and
maneuverability that would be able to handle the water currents
there.

Hewitt designed a 21-foot (6.4-m) craft with two wide, tanklike
rubber treads that can pivot 180 degrees when afloat. When on the
ground, the treads spread the vehicle’s weight over a large surface
area, improving traction and exerting minimal pressure on the
ground. Hewitt installed a simple hydraulic pump to lift and lower
these treads vertically in and out of the water. In sea mode, the
Chevy TrailBlazer engine drives an outboard propeller. In land
mode, the treads drop so the engine can muscle the craft up onto
shore. His creation is the first-ever amphibious vehicle with a fully
retractable drive assembly—one that needs just 18 seconds to go
from sea cruiser to land rover.

The craft can reach speeds of up to 30 miles per hour (48 km/h)
and effortlessly trek through mud flats, bogs, rivers, ice, snow, and
lakes—and do it with a 1,500-pound (680-kg) load. There’s room
for a crew of five and all the gear they need for search and rescue,
patrol, geological surveying, and other fieldwork. Ironically, though,
Hewitt hasn’t gotten around to taking it duck hunting yet.
  SEA MONSTER
  Hewitt increased the cab’s ability to resist water by adding
  foam sandwiched between layers of aluminum to its panels.




252 HACK AN OVERSIZE AIR HOCKEY PUCK
STEP 1 Cut a hole in the top of a smoke-detector case. Make sure
the hole is large enough to mount the propeller and motor from a
remote-controlled plane or helicopter.

STEP 2 To protect the smoke detector’s outer surface, coat it
completely (except for the bottom rim and the hole) with rubberized
foam coating.

STEP 3 Connect six AAA batteries in series using aluminum-foil
duct tape. Glue the cells onto a round piece of plastic with
ventilation holes, making sure that the weight is evenly distributed.

STEP 4 Wire the motor, an on/off switch, and the battery together,
and attach the cap to the smaller end of the smoke detector with
hot glue.

STEP 5 Place the larger end on the floor. The air should be sucked
up through the detector vents.

STEP 6 Enjoy air hockey beyond the confines of the tabletop
version.




253 SCORE WITH PING-PONG PADDLE GLOVES
STEP 1 Using a handsaw, cut the handles off two Ping-Pong
paddles.

STEP 2 Cut two pieces of plywood into wedges. The widest part
should measure 3 inches (7.5 cm) in width; the narrowest should
measure 1 inch (2.5 cm) in width. Both should be 4 inches (10 cm)
long.

STEP 3 Drill a hole in each of the two plywood pieces, one that’s
large enough for your thumb, and one that’s large enough for your
fingertips to protrude.
STEP 4 Sandwich the wood pieces between the paddles so that
the glove fits your dominant hand and the thumb and finger holes
align. Secure with wood glue.

STEP 5 Dominate at the table.




254 ASSEMBLE A PVC-PIPE SOCCER GOAL
STEP 1 Use a handsaw to cut twelve lengths of 1½-inch (3.75-cm)
PVC pipe so that you have four 2-foot (60-cm) sections, four 6-foot
(1.8-m) sections, two 8-foot (2.4-m) sections, and two 10-foot (3-m)
sections.

STEP 2 Put the goal together without glue first, using six 1½-inch
(3.75-cm) rounded PVC elbows and four 1½-inch (3.75-cm) T-style
PVC connectors. Make sure that all the pieces fit together correctly.

STEP 3 To glue, pull apart one joint at a time and spread PVC glue
on the inside of the connector and the outside of the pipe.
Reconnect the joint. (If you want to keep your soccer goal portable,
leave a few joints unglued.)

STEP 4 Once you’ve glued all the joints, leave the structure to set.

STEP 5 To make the net, wrap netting around the goal and cut it to
size, leaving a bit of extra netting around the edges. Attach the net
using zip ties wrapped around the frame every 6 inches (15 cm).

STEP 6 Find a goalie to stand in front of your soccer goal, and get
kicking.




255 TRANSFORM A BIKE INTO A B-BALL HOOP
STEP 1 Detach the entire front section of the bicycle frame, from
the handlebars down to the fork.

STEP 2 Adjust the handlebars to a horizontal angle, then mount the
detached section of the frame to a large piece of wood using three
U-clamps: one directly under the handlebars, two at the fork’s top.
STEP 3 To use an old bicycle wheel for the hoop, remove the tire
and clip off the spokes with wire cutters, leaving the hoop empty in
the middle.

STEP 4 Set the hoop in the center of the handlebars, then use
hose clamps to attach it. Make sure that the hoop rests parallel to
the ground when the backboard is vertical.

STEP 5 Attach a net using zip ties or wire.

STEP 6 Shoot some hoops.




256 SERVE UP A TENNIS BALL
This is one piece of sporting equipment that’s
useful both on and off the court.
STEALTHY SHOOTER
Poke a hole in a tennis ball and fill it with water for an instant
squirt gun.

SUPER GRIP
Slice a tennis ball in half and use one half as a grip to twist off
pesky stuck lids on jars.

HAMMER TIME
Protect surfaces while you hammer nails by cutting an X into
the ball and sliding the head of the hammer inside it.

LIGHTBULB MOMENT
Got a broken lightbulb that you need to remove? With the
light’s switch and breaker turned off, clear the shards away
from the bulb, press the tennis ball against the socket, and
unscrew with the ball protecting your hand.

DOOR STOPPER
If you’ve ever had a doorknob smash through a wall when
someone flung the door open, you know it can really hurt your
chances of getting your apartment security deposit back. Cut a
hole in a tennis ball and put it over the doorknob—it’ll help
keep your drywall intact.
257 Turn Your Backyard into a Badminton Court
Badminton—it’s the gentleman’s tennis. Set up
your own court and show that birdie who’s
boss.

MATERIALS
Shovel
Landscaper’s rake
2x4 boards
Topsoil
Sand
Chalk line marker
Court divider net
Posts for the net

STEP 1 Identify a spot on your land where there’s room to build the
court. Mark off a 20-by-44-foot (6-by-13.2-m) rectangle, allowing for
a little extra room around the edges.

STEP 2 Use a landscaper’s rake to level off this area, and also to
create a slight slope. The whole court should slope 4 inches (10
cm) toward one end and 1 inch (2.5 cm) toward one side for
drainage.

STEP 3 Use a shovel to excavate the area to a depth of 3 inches
(7.5 cm), and then set in 2x4 boards along the edges as borders.

STEP 4 Mix together the topsoil and sand, and fill in the area with
the mixture. Use the rake to smooth it out.

STEP 5 Mark the boundaries of the court with a chalk line marker
according to the diagram.

STEP 6Drive posts into the ground on either side of the court’s
center line. Tie the net to the posts so that it hangs at a height of 5
feet (1.5 m) in the center of the court.
STEP 7If desired, set up lights around the court to enable nighttime
play.

STEP 8 Grab a racket and start practicing your backhand.




258 MAKE A MINI-GOLF COURSE
Practice your swing on a Pebble Beach course
you designed yourself.

MATERIALS
¾-inch (1.9-cm) medium- density fiberboard
Deck balusters
Craft knife
Wood glue
Drill with 4-inch (10-cm) hole saw
Green felt
Dropcloth
Spray adhesive
PVC pipe fitting
Composite wood balusters
Artificial turf
STEP 1 Sketch out a diagram of the course, marking any obstacles
you want to add. The materials you’ll need will depend on this
design, so be sure to measure everything out before beginning
your build.

STEP 2 Cut a sheet of medium-density fiberboard to size according
to your diagram. You may need several sheets to create a long or
irregularly shaped course.

STEP 3 Line up deck balusters along each edge of the sheet,
cutting them to size as necessary. Use wood glue to hold the
balusters in place, then allow the structure to dry.

STEP 4 Once the balusters are set, use a drill fitted with a 4-inch
(10-cm) hole saw to cut a hole in the fiberboard sheet, placed
according to your diagram. This will be the course’s hole.

STEP 5 Cut green felt so it will cover the fiberboard sheet and wrap
over the balusters.

STEP 6 Set the fiberboard sheet down on a dropcloth, balusters
down, and spray the top with adhesive. Spray the felt with the
adhesive, too, and let both pieces dry.

STEP 7 Place the fiberboard sheet top-down on the center of the
felt, and spray more adhesive on the balusters and around the
hole. After this has dried, wrap the excess felt over the balusters,
trimming as needed.

STEP 8 Slice the felt inside the hole into sections, and fold it back
so that the hole is clear.

STEP 9 Flip the sheet over, cut a PVC pipe fitting to just fill the
space between the top of the hole and the floor, and insert it into
the hole as a liner.
STEP 10 Line the edges of the course with lengths of composite
wood baluster.

STEP 11 Build obstacles and use artificial turf for rough.

STEP 12 Hit the links.




BATTER UP
Frank Barnes, a 30-year-old industrial artist, dreamed up this 265-
pound (120-kg) quasi-human-shaped robot made from a jumble of
salvaged auto parts, steel piping, and pneumatic hoses for the sole
purpose of belting every fastball thrown its way. The Headless
Batsman won’t make the majors, but Barnes suggests another
career option: “Put some wheels on it, drive it around—I figure I can
use it for security.”
259 INSTALL AN AT-HOME ROCK WALL
We can’t all have Mount Everest in our
backyards. But you can still get your climb on
with this rock wall.

MATERIALS
Tape measure
Stud finder
Pencil
¾-inch (1.9-cm) plywood
Saw
2x4s
Screws
2-inch (5-cm) drywall screws
⅜-inch (9.5-mm) T-nuts
Drill
Hammer
Nails
Handholds

STEP 1 Scout for a good wall. It absolutely must be load-bearing to
support the weight of your wall (and you on it!). Come up with a
design that will fit the space.

STEP 2 Use a stud finder to locate the studs in your wall, and then
mark them with a pencil. (You’ll be mounting your climbing wall
alongside your original wall, and you’ll want the studs of both walls
to align.) Be sure to mark the top of where you’d like your wall to
end as well.

STEP 3 Cut your ¾-inch (1.9-cm) plywood to size based on your
design.
STEP 4 Measure the height of your plywood, then subtract the
widths of the 2x4 plates you’ll be mounting on top and on bottom.
Cut at least four studs to this height, then measure the width of
your plywood and cut your top and bottom plate to this width.

STEP 5 Screw the four studs into place on your bottom plate so
that they match the placement of the studs in your existing wall.
Then screw on the top plate.

STEP 6 Before attaching your plywood to the existing wall, place T-
nuts in the back of the plywood in a design of your choosing. This is
where your handholds will go.

STEP 7 Line up your plywood wall with the existing wall. Predrill
holes along the studs every 8 inches (20 cm) vertically and use
long screws to attach the plywood.

STEP 8 Once your wall is securely mounted, screw handholds into
the T-nut holes. (You can leave some T-nut holes empty and
reposition or add additional handholds later to change up your
course.)

STEP 9 Release your inner Spider-Man.




260 HANG PVC FITNESS RINGS
Quit the gym but still get a workout with this
simple build.

MATERIALS
Twine
1-inch (2.5-cm) PVC pipe
Sand
Duct tape
Baking sheet
Aluminum foil
Oven mitts
Paint cans
Heavy-duty nylon rope
Lashing straps

STEP 1Soak two 3-feet (90-cm) lengths of twine in water, then
thread them each through 2-foot (60-cm) lengths of PVC pipe,
letting 6 inches (15 cm) dangle from each end.

STEP 2 Fully cover one end of each pipe with duct tape, leaving
the twine sticking out. Fill each pipe with sand, then cover the other
ends with tape.

STEP 3Set your oven to 200°F (93°C). Place the pipes on a foil-
covered baking sheet and heat them for 8 to 10 minutes.

STEP 4Using oven mitts, remove the pipes from the oven and wrap
them around old paint cans to mold them into a circular shape. Tie
the ends of the twine together to hold the pipe in this shape as it
cools.

STEP 5 Once the pipes have cooled, remove the duct-tape caps,
sand, and twine. Loop a length of heavy-duty nylon rope twice
through each pipe, then tie the rope off with a square knot. Thread
any excess rope back through the pipe.
STEP 6Use lashing straps to hang the rings from a sturdy structure
with the knot at the top of each ring.

STEP 7 Start practicing your inverted cross.




261 A TILTING PING-PONG TABLE THAT
THROWS OFF OPPONENTS
A group of young designers reinvent ping-pong.
Welcome to “swing pong.”

Internships are often mindless, coffee-fetching black holes of
boredom. But not at Syyn Labs, a Los Angeles collective that
creates unusual interactive art and science projects for
commercials and music videos. Last summer, student interns Hoon
Oh, Robb Godshaw, and Jisu Choi took it upon themselves to
reinvent the sport of table tennis. Their project could pass for an
extra in Transformers: It’s part ping-pong table, part machine, and
so difficult to play that it reduces pros to the level of rank amateurs.

Oh came up with the idea of doing a ping-pong project because the
game is a staple of so many cultures around the globe, and is
normally relatively easy to play. They wanted to make the game
more social than competitive, so they eliminated the potential for
humiliating one-sided contests by building a table that tilts on
demand and makes it tough for even highly skilled players.

They started by scrounging for parts in the Syyn Labs warehouse.
A rectangular piece of Plexiglas that had once been used in an
illuminated dance floor became the tabletop. To drive the tilting
surface, Godshaw suggested using pneumatic pistons left over
from a commercial for a Google science fair. Choi worked on the
drive system and other aspects of the design, while Oh wrote
software to control the pistons and switch the table from level to off-
kilter. The group found that getting the angles correct was tricky.
“We wanted to make it tilt at a dramatic angle but not hit anybody in
the jaw,” Godshaw says.

They were right about leveling gameplay—when table-tennis pro
Adam Bobrow visited Syyn Labs, he won his match by only a single
point. In fact, the game is such strange, absurd fun, Godshaw says,
that competition is an afterthought: “Most games never make it to
nine.”
262 ORGANIZE CORDS ON THE GO
STEP 1 Cut a sheet of foam into a dog-bone shape, then cut a slit
into each end.

STEP 2 Tuck your media player’s cord into the slit to secure it and
wrap the excess cord around the bone’s center.

STEP 3 Pump jams while you jog without having to jump rope over
cords.




263 RUN IN NO-SLIP SHOES
Experience the joy of added traction in the most
rugged terrain.

MATERIALS
Running shoes
Thirty sheet-metal screws ½ to ⅜ inch (1.25 to 9.5 mm), depending on thickness
    of shoe soles)
Drill
Clamps

STEP 1 Decide how to distribute the screws on the sole of each
shoe. Use about 15 screws per shoe, scattered evenly between the
front and back of the sole. Mark where you want to place each one,
avoiding any pockets of air or gel in the sole.

STEP 2 Use a drill to insert the screws at your marks. You may
need to exert extra pressure on the drill for tough rubber—try
clamping the shoe if necessary. Tighten the screws only until the
heads touch the rubber.

STEP 3 Test them out (outside, unless you don’t mind leaving
gouges in your floor). If the screws make you feel off balance, try
removing or adding some to compensate.
264 THE MOT0RIZED EASY CHAIR
Getting to class just got a little faster.

Chris McIntosh’s first recliner was not your standard La-Z-Boy: It
was electric-powered and capable of going 15 miles per hour (24
km/h). After he finished making it, he pulled a doughnut on his high
school’s front lawn, circled the gym during a pep rally, and ruled the
street near his home in Orinda, California.

McIntosh spent his youth building ad hoc vehicles (he once made a
mini hovercraft out of a leaf blower), so when the chair’s paltry
electric motor burned out, he decided it was time for a monster
makeover. “I wanted to go fast,” he says.

To upgrade the recliner, he removed the electric motor he had
installed, the motor’s controller, a pair of batteries, and other parts.
He bought a 9-horsepower, four-stroke dirt-bike engine, which fit
perfectly in the space beneath the seat, and welded on a fixed rear
axle so that the engine could power both rear wheels instead of just
one. Bike engines need to be kick-started, but the recliner’s lever
snapped when he tried to use it. He welded on a motorcycle kick-
start lever instead.

Then there was the danger of the vehicle catching on fire. The dirt-
bike engine’s exhaust pipe got so hot that it sometimes glowed red
and threatened to set the upholstery (and McIntosh) ablaze. To
avert disaster, he rerouted the pipe, mounting it farther from the
underside of the chair, and covered it with fireproof wrap. His
parents were pleased.

Still, the first test drive was frightening: McIntosh immediately
popped an accidental 45-degree wheelie. He added 30 pounds
(13.6 kg) of weights near his feet to keep the front down, along with
a roll bar and harness for safety. The chair has no suspension at
all. “The ride gets a bit bumpy,” McIntosh says. “But then again,
there’s plenty of padding.”

He says he has now mastered climbing hills and turning corners,
although he’s planning to add a rearview mirror to reduce the large
blind spot behind the backrest. The newly completed gas-powered
version now goes 40 miles per hour (64 km/h) and, just as
important, he says, “It sounds like a Harley.”
STREET ILLEGAL
McIntosh figured the chair wouldn’t be street legal, so he
designed it to fit in the back of his hatchback. To load it, he
slides off the backrest, leans a ramp against the back of his
car, and pushes the heavy frame up and in. He typically uses it
in parking lots, but he does occasionally take it around local
streets and even took it to USC’s homecoming parade.
GLOSSARY
ALLIGATOR clip Spring-loaded clip that can be used to connect a
component to a wire in a temporary circuit.

ALUMINUM flashing Thin sheet of aluminum; often used in
weatherproofing to prevent water from flowing through a joint.

AMPLIFIER Component that augments the power of a signal. In
circuits, an amplifier is usually used to increase the voltage or
current.

ANTENNA Wire, thin metal pole, or other device that can transmit
or receive electromagnetic waves, such as TV or radio waves.

ARDUINO Common, open-source microcontroller. There are
various types of Arduino microcontrollers, but all can be
programmed using the same programming language.

BLACK LIGHT Type of lamp that gives off ultraviolet light. Many
substances emit fluorescence that can be seen under a black light,
but not in normal lighting conditions.

BREADBOARD Base used to set up temporary circuits and test
them out before soldering components together.

BREAKOUT BOARD Electrical component that allows you easier
access to tightly spaced pins on a microchip or densely bundled
wires. The device connects the hard-to-reach pins or wires to an
easier-to-access interface.

BUSHING Connector used to join pipes of different diameters; one
end has a smaller opening, the other end a larger one. A bushing
can also be called a reducing coupling.

CAPACITOR Electrical component that stores energy within a
circuit. Unlike a battery, a capacitor does not produce energy, it
simply contains or filters the energy already flowing through the
circuit.

CIRCUIT Closed loop through which electrical current flows. A
circuit is often used to power an electrical device.

CIRCUIT BOARD Thin, insulated board on which electrical
components are mounted and connected together. A printed circuit
board has thin conductive strips printed on the board, allowing
connections to be made between components largely without the
use of wires.

CLAMP Device used to hold an object tightly in place. Clamps can
vary widely in size and construction, and can be intended for
temporary or permanent use.

COAXIAL CABLE Cable with a central conductive wire,
surrounded by an insulating layer, which in turn is surrounded by a
conductive tube. A coaxial cable is often used to transmit radio or
cable television signals.

COIN BATTERY Also called a button cell, a coin battery is a small,
flat, disc-shaped battery that is often used to power portable
electronic devices.

CONDUCTIVITY Capacity to transmit an electrical current; it can
also refer to the measure of a substance’s ability to transmit
electrical current.

CONTACT Point where an electrical component is connected to a
wire or circuit board.

COUPLER Short section of piping used to join two pipes together.

CRAFT KNIFE Small, fixed-blade knife used to make precise cuts.
DESOLDERING Removing solder to detach components from a
circuit or circuit board. Desoldering can be used to fix a fault in a
circuit, or to replace a component.

DIODE Electronic component with one terminal that has high
resistance, and another terminal with low resistance. A diode is
used to allow current to flow in one direction but not another.

DRILL Tool used to cut holes in a variety of materials. A drill is
usually powered by electricity, and comes with an array of
interchangeable bits in different sizes.

ELECTRICAL TAPE Type of tape covered in an insulating
material, often used to cover and connect electrical wires.

ELECTRICAL WIRE Insulated strand of conductive material used
to carry electricity.

ELECTRODE Conductor used to transmit current to a non-metallic
material. Electrodes are used in arc welding to fuse objects
together.

EPOXY Adhesive made from a type of resin that becomes rigid
when heated or cured.

EXHAUST FAN Fan used to ventilate a workspace; it is
particularly important to use an exhaust fan when working with
materials that emit toxic fumes.

FIBER OPTIC CABLE Cable made up of thin fibers that transmit
light from one end of the fiber to the other. A fiber optic cable can
carry signals and provide illumination.

FLASH DRIVE Small data-storage device that can be connected
to a computer, often via a USB port.
FRESNEL LENS Thin lens made of a number of smaller lens
segments. A Fresnel lens magnifies a light source, and is often
used in projectors and spotlights.

GROUND WIRE Wire in a circuit that provides a return path for
current, often leading to the earth. A ground wire can prevent the
buildup of dangerous static electricity in a circuit.

HACKSAW Fine-toothed saw held in a frame. A hacksaw can be
used to cut metal or other hard materials.

HEAT-SHRINK tubing Tubing that contracts when heated; often
used to insulate wires or to create a protective seal.

HEAT SINK Device that channels heat away from an electronic
system, keeping it cool enough to operate properly.

HOLE SAW Cylindrical saw blade, used to cut holes of uniform
size. A hole saw is usually used in a drill, in place of the drill bit, to
create a large hole.

HOLOGRAPHY Technique that allows for the capture of a lifelike
3D image. The resulting hologram looks different when viewed
from different angles, much as a real-world scene would.
INSULATION Material, such as the nonconductive coating around
an electrical wire, that prevents current or heat from flowing.

INTEGRATED CIRCUIT Also called a microchip, this small, thin
device is a complete circuit etched or imprinted on a
semiconductive surface. An integrated circuit allows for complex
circuitry to be condensed into an extremely small space, and is
vital to the operation of many modern electronic devices, notably
computers.

JIGSAW Tool (usually a power tool) with a long, thin saw blade. A
jigsaw is useful in cutting curves and irregular shapes.

JOINT The point at which two objects are connected together. In
woodworking, creating a join may involve cutting a notch or angle
into the pieces of wood to be joined; in metalworking, the process
often involves soldering or welding.

LASER Device that emits a tightly focused beam of light. Lasers
vary widely in intensity, and can be as weak as a laser pointer, or
strong enough to cut through extremely hard and thick materials.
LCD MONITOR Display that uses liquid crystals to bend and
shape light to create an image. In an LCD monitor, the liquid
crystal material is sandwiched between two electrodes and filtered
through a layer of polarizing film.

LEAD A wire extending from an electronic component that is used
to connect that component to another electronic part.

LED Diode that gives off light. They are usually more energy-
efficient than incandescent light sources, and can be much
smaller.

LITHIUM-ION BATTERY Type of rechargeable battery often used
in consumer electronics. A lithium-ion battery commonly carries a
large amount of energy for its size, and loses charge relatively
slowly when not in use.

MICROCONTROLLER Tiny dedicated computer, contained on a
single chip that can be embedded within a larger device.

MULTIMETER Device that measures electrical current, resistance,
and voltage. A multimeter is very helpful for monitoring and
identifying problems in circuits.

O-RING Circular seal used in joining cylinders together. An O-ring
is usually seated inside a joint to prevent leaks.

OHM Unit of measurement of electrical resistance.

OPTICAL MOUSE Computer mouse that uses an LED to sense
motion, as opposed to the rolling ball used by a mechanical
mouse.

PARTICLEBOARD Composite wood-based material
manufactured from small chips or shavings of wood joined
together by resin.
PEG-BOARD Plank or sheet of wood pre-drilled with a grid of
evenly spaced small holes, A Peg-Board is useful for mounting
hooks and tools on a wall.

PHOTOCELL Device that produces a flow of current when
exposed to light. A photocell can detect the presence (or absence)
of light or other radiation.

PLEXIGLAS Hard, transparent plastic; looks like glass but is more
lightweight and durable.

POLARIZING FILM Sheet of material, often used in LCD
monitors, that allows only light polarized in a specific direction to
pass through.

PORT Point of interface between one device and another. On
computers, common ports include Ethernet ports and USB ports.

POTENTIOMETER Three-terminal electrical component that acts
as a variable resistor. These adjust the flow of current through a
circuit, and are often used in dimmer switches or volume controls.

PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE Language used to convey
instructions to a computer or other machine. Many distinct
programming languages are used for different purposes and types
of hardware.

PROJECT BOX Box designed to contain the components of a
circuit; useful for mounting and protecting the elements of a
device.

PVC PIPE Type of durable, lightweight plastic pipe often used to
carry liquids in plumbing.

PVC PIPE CEMENT Adhesive designed to connect pieces of PVC
material together.
REBAR Ridged bar of steel, often used in construction to reinforce
concrete or masonry.

RECIPROCATING SAW Power tool that cuts with the back-and-
forth motion of a saw blade.

REED SWITCH Switch composed of metal reeds enclosed in a
tiny glass container. The reeds react to the presence of a magnetic
field by either opening or closing the switch.

RESISTOR Two-terminal electrical component that resists the flow
of an electric current. A resistor is used in a circuit to control the
direction and strength of the current flowing through it.

ROTARY TOOL Power tool with a wide variety of interchangeable
bits that can be used for different purposes. A rotary tool can cut,
polish, carve, or grind, and is particularly good for detail work.

SAFETY GOGGLES Glasses that shield the eye area from heat,
chemicals, and debris.

SCHEMATIC Two-dimensional map of an electrical circuit. A
schematic uses a set of symbols to stand for the components of a
circuit, and shows the connections between components.

SKETCH When working with Arduino microcontrollers, a sketch is
a program that can be loaded into an Arduino.

SLAG Scrap metal that results from the welding process.

SOLDERING Connecting two metal objects together by melting
solder (a type of metal) with a soldering iron to create a strong
joint between the objects.

SUGRU Type of silicone-based putty that can be molded for about
30 minutes after it is removed from its packaging. Sugru cures to a
solid but somewhat flexible state after 24 hours.
SWITCH Component that can stop the flow of current in a circuit,
or allow it to continue. These include push-button switches, rocker
switches, toggle switches, and many other devices.

TABLE SAW Machine that cuts wood or other materials with a
rapidly spinning serrated metal disc. A circular saw is usually
powered by electricity, and often mounted within a safety guard.

T-CONNECTOR Short section of pipe with three openings; used to
connect lengths of pipe into a T shape.

TERMINAL End point of a conductor in a circuit; also a point at
which connections can be made to a larger network.

TOUCHSCREEN An electronic display screen that users interact
with by touching with their fingers; the screen detects touch within
the display area.

TRANSFORMER Device that transfers current from one circuit to
another. A transformer can also be used to alter the voltage of an
alternating current.

TRANSISTOR Semiconducting electrical component with at least
three leads; can control or amplify the flow of electricity in a circuit.

USB Universal Serial Bus; an extremely common type of
connector for computer and other electronic components.

VISE Type of clamp, often affixed to a table, that uses a screw to
hold an object tightly in place.

VOLT Unit of measurement for electrical potential.

WELDING Process of joining pieces of metal together by melting
them slightly and introducing a filler material at the joint.
WIRE cutter Pliers with sharp diagonal edges used to cut lengths
of wire.

WIRE STRIPPER Device composed of a set of scissor-like blades
with a central notch; used to strip the insulation from the outside of
electrical wires.

ZIP TIES Self-closing fastener. When the end of a zip tie is
inserted into the slot at its head and tightened, it creates a loop
that can’t easily be loosened.
INDEX

A
air freshener, car 232
air hockey puck, oversize 252
air horns, car horns replaced with 234
alarm system, laser 086
aluminum foil 087, 205
amphibious vehicle 251
antenna, dipole 154
antennas
   cell phone 155
   HDTV 157
   radio 154
   Wi-fi 156
aquarium, installed in TV 097
arcade game, miniature 054
Arduino
   distance sensor using 235
   electrified drums using 078
   lie detector using 152
   programming 006
Arold, Gary 027


B
badminton court, backyard as 257
Barnes, Frank 258
basketball hoop, from bicycle parts 255
batsman, robot 258
Beaty, William 197
beer
  brewing machine for 014
  carabiner bottle opener for 016
  droid server for 021
  foam-lined party cup as insulator for 020
  quick chilling method for 018
  shower caddy for 017
  soda-can disguise for 019
beverages
  droid server for 021
  glow-in-the-dark 023
  Jell-O cups for 022
  LEGO ice cubes for 024
  melon dispenser for 015
  mint-tin shaker for 051
  party cups for 020
  See also beer
bicycles
  basketball hoop using parts from 255
  bottle-cap rearview mirror for 218
  camera mounted on 207
  converted to unicycle 222
  map mounted on 223
  pant-leg protector for riding 216
  reinforced tires for 217
  repurposing tire tubes of 226
  saddle theft protection for 225
  snowproofed tires for 224
  speaker mounted on 220
  spirograph using parts from 041
  tightening handlebar grips on 219
Bobrow, Adam 261
Boogaarts, Martin 055
boom-box duffel bag 070
bottle caps, repurposed 117
Bronsveld, Gerrit 055
broom, attached to remote-controlled toy car 112
Burning Man festival 066


C
cameras
  aerial shots using weather balloon 246
  audio-triggered flash for 214
  DSLR, with manual lens 212
  fisheye lens for using door peephole 211
  large-scale prints for 215
  mounted on bicycle handlebars 207
  panoramic shots using kitchen timer 208
  party cup as lens hood for 020
  plastic-bottle diffuser for 209
  plastic cup as tripod for 206
  remote shutter release for 213
  surveillance 109
  waterproofed with condoms 210
campfires, coloration of 035
camping shower 239
canoe paddle, improved 249
cans, used as organizers 082
carabiner bottle opener 016
cardboard
  hammock 138
  life-size cutout 137
  telephone casing 139
  window blinds 140
Carnett, John B. 014, 227
cassette casing, flash drive attached to 168
cassette player, audio art project using 067
catapult, miniature 040
cat door 143
CDs. See compact discs
CD storage spool, as cord organizer 192
cell phones
   aluminum foil as signal blocker for 205
   antenna for 155
   silicone rubber protector for 159
   solar charger for 163
   See also smartphones
charger, emergency USB 236
checkers
   bottle-cap 117
   giant 057
Choi, Jisu 261
circuits
   construction of 04
   parts for 03
   uses for 187
climbing wall 259
clocks
   dartboard 103
   persistence-of-vision 102
clothes hanger, collapsible 243
coasters
   compact disks as 077
   smart 118
coffee cans, repurposed 119
compact discs, repurposed 077, 107, 150, 192, 247
computers
  fake desktop screen for 179
  foot-powered mouse for 172
  magnet-activated on/off switch for 177
  privacy-protected monitor for 180
  See also hard drive; laptops
computer tower, engraving on 173
cooking
  with clay-pot smoker 122
  hot dogs with electrical wire 025
  with solar umbrella 123
  with sous-vide cooker 121
cooler, fan installed in 241
cord organizers 192, 262
credit cards, protection of information on 087
cups
  as camera tripod 206
  Jell-O 022
  plastic 020, 206
  speakers made with 075
cutting board, crumb-collecting 115


D
dance floor with LEDs 033
dartboard clock 103
dining-table automobile 120
distance sensor, for cars 235
doghouse, high-tech 141
door, secret 084
doorknobs
  repurposed 083
  tennis-ball protector for 256
drawers, Rubik’s-cube-style 134
drinks. See beverages
drive-in theater 099
drumsticks, electrified 078
duct tape, uses for 136
duffel bag, boom box made with 070
dumbbell, weighted with CDs 194


E
earbuds, custom-fit 076
easy chair, motorized 264
ebook reader case 105
engraving, on computer tower 173


F
film-roll keychain 089
fire
   cloth balls of 036
   green 035
   medicine-bottle sparkler 038
   propane gun 034
   sound tube with 034
   turntable tornado of 037
fitness rings, using PVC pipe 260
flash drives
   cassette case for 168
   frayed USB cable attached to 170
   LEGO case for 171
   pink-eraser disguise for 169
   in secret locations 062
flashlights
   krypton bulb in 203
   miniature 202
Flipperdinger 079
floppy disks, storage box using 193
food freshness timer 114
Forbes, David 094
fountain, toilet-powered 124
Fuller, Buckminster 146


G
games
  bottle-cap checkers 117
  gaming chair for 094
  giant checkers 057
  Magic 8 Ball 060
  mini arcade 054
  Nintendo-controller belt for 055
  pinball 048
  ping-pong 261
  pocket billiard set 053
  Skee-Ball 049
  super-size Operation 056
garden hose, repurposed 147
gearshift knob, customized 237
geodesic dome 146
Gill, John 027
glove
  for animatronic hand 065
  ping-pong-paddle 253
  for touchscreen 073
glow stick 032
Godshaw, Robb 261
goggles, infrared 199
golf cart, truck-engine-powered 147
Google Street View, glasses for 61
graffiti laser 099
greenhouse, CD-case 150
grinding tool, from hard drive 128
grow lights, LED 149
Grubb, Randy 230
guitar, mint-tin 052
guns
  fire-shooting 034
  potato-shooting 027
  pumpkin-shooting 027
  water-shooting 039


H
hammock, cardboard 138
hand, animatronic 065
hard drive, computer
  external 183
  as grinding tool 128
  refrigerator magnets from 116
headphones, attached to hoodie 072
Hewitt, Stan 251
hologram 058
hood ornament 231
hot dogs, cooked with electric wire 025
hot rod, logging truck converted to 230
hovercraft, miniature 247


I
ice cubes, LEGO 024
identity theft, protection against 087
infrared goggles 199
ink, conductive 198
Iron Man 044


J
Jannot, Mark 099
Jell-O cups 022
jetpack, water-powered 047
junk-mail pencils 042


K
kayak, converted to sailboat 250
Kayser, Markus 201
keyboards, computer
  portable roll-up 185
  thumbtacks using keys of 184
keychain, film-roll 089
Krasnow, Ben 197


L
lamps. See lights
laptops
  case colors for, using fabric dye 175
  cooling system for 181
  paper-binder stand for 188
  whiteboard top for 174
  wood veneer casing for 176
lasers
  alarm system with 086
   carpenter’s level with 130
   as cutting tool 200
   harp 080
   projector 099
Lawlor, Lindsay 066
lawnmower, self-guiding 148
LED displays
   and conductive ink 198
   in dance floor 033
   in glow stick 032
   as grow lights 149
   in hot-dog-cooking device 025
   in super-size Operation game 056
   in light box 030
   in lighter 031
   miniature flashlight with 202
   on motorcycle 228
   on motorcycle helmet 229
   in mousepad 186
   in planetarium 028
   in smart coaster 118
   as wearable television 094
LEGOs
   flash-drive case using 171
   ice cubes of 024
   pinball machine with 055
   zoetrope using 043
Li, Raymond 047
lie detector 152
lights
   glow-in-the-dark beverages 023
   glow-in-the-dark ties 071
   hanging liquid lamps 100
   light box 030
   liquid light show 029
   party cup chandelier 020
   planetarium 028
   retro lamp base 101
   See also LED displays
light saber 059


M
magazine rack, polystyrene 104
Magic 8 Ball 060
magnetic tape, art using 067
magnets
  ferrofluid with 046
  miniature motor with 064
  refrigerator, from hard drive 116
  refrigerator, in bottle caps 117
  silly putty with 045
  as stud finders 127
  with wristband 129
mail sorter, CD 107
Marshall, Vin 034
McIntosh, Chris 264
melon drink dispenser 015
metalworking 011, 012, 013
microcontrollers 005
mini-golf course 258
mint tins
  billiard set made with,053
  guitar made with 052
  martini shaker made with 051
  racer made with 050
monitors, computer
 privacy-protected 180
 as storage rack 191
motorcycle, illuminated with LEDs 228
motorcycle helmet, illuminated with LEDs 229
mouse (control device)
 foot-powered 172
 remote activation of 182
mousepad, LED-lit 186
Munich, Adam 195
music
 bicycle speaker for 220
 with booby-trapped safe 088
 with boom-box duffel bag 070
 with custom-fit earbuds 076
 laser harp for making 080
 with light box 030
 with liquid light show 029
 mint-tin guitar for making 052
 with paper-cup speakers 075
 pocket theremin for making 080
 with Rubens’ tube 034
 with upgraded phonograph 074


N
nail clipper, mini catapult using 040
netbooks, touchscreen modification for 165
Nintendo-controller belt 055


O
Oh, Hoon 261
Operation game, super-size 056
oscilloscope, TV used as 095
overhead projector, for liquid light show 029


P
party cups, uses of 020
pencils, junk-mail 042
persistence-of-vision clock 102
pet feeder, automatic 142
phonograph, upgraded 074
photo frame, digital 092
pinball games 048, 055
ping-pong
  gloves made with paddles for 253
  tilting table for 261
pizza-box turntable 068
planetarium 028
plasma globe 197
polarized light, privacy-protected monitor using 180
polygraph test 152
poofers, propane 034
Poole, Chris 099
postage scale, magnetic 108
potato gun 027
Price, Jamie 021
printer, computer
  in drawer 190
  as shredder 106
printer, 3D, solar-powered 201
propane
  in fire gun 034
  in Rubens’ tube 034
pumpkin gun 027
PVC pipe
  collapsible travel hanger using 243
  fitness rings using 260
  geodesic dome made with 146
  kayak converted to sailboat using 250
  light saber using 059
  mini-golf course using 258
  pinball game using 048
  potato launcher made with 027
  roller coaster made with 047
  soccer goal made with 254
  squirt gun made with 039
  windmill using 144


R
radiation detector 196
radio
  dipole antenna for 154
  foxhole 153
radio-frequency ID chips, protection of 087
razor, protective clip for 245
refrigerator magnets, from hard drive 116
remote display, for computers 161
robots
  artistic 110
  giraffe 066
  surveillance 109
  toothbrush 063
rocket, miniature 248
roller coaster, homemade 047
Roomba cleaning robot
  as paint applicator 110
  as surveillance camera 109
Rubik’s cube, chest of drawers as 134
running shoes, improved traction for 263
rust removal, using electricity 111


S
safes
   electrical-outlet disguise for 087
   musical booby trap for 090
sailboat, kayak converted to 250
Samuelson, Darren 215
sander, miniature 135
scanning electron microscope, homemade 197
screwdrivers
   electric, instant charge for 131
   miniature 132
screws, stripped, removal of 133
scrub brush, attached to power saw 113
seat, TV console used as 096
shaving razor, as miniature sander 135
showerhead, double 125
shredder, printer modified into 106
silly putty, magnetized 045
skateboards 227
Skee-Ball game 049
smartphones
   projector for 162
   tripod for 164
   Xbox 360 controller as case for 158
smoker, clay-pot 122
snowblower, high-powered 151
soccer goal, with PVC pipe 254
solar chargers 145, 163, 240
solar cooker 123
solar-powered 3D printer 201
soldering, how-to 001, 002, 003, 004
sparkler, medicine-bottle 038
speakerphone 160
speakers
  bicycle-mounted 220
  hidden 085
  paper-cup 075
spectrometer, cereal-box 195
spirograph 041
spotlight, miniature 204
squirt guns 039
stud finder, magnetic 127
stylus, for touchscreens 166
suitcases, attaching wheels to 244
surveillance camera, attached to Roomba 109
Syyn Labs 261


T
taillights, car, masks for 233
telephone casing, cardboard 139
television
   aquarium installed in 097
   as digital-device monitor 091–092
   liquor cabinet in console of 098
   as oscilloscope 095
   seat in console of 096
   slideshow on 091
   wearable LED 094
tennis ball, repurposed 256
Tesla coil, miniature 197
theremin, pocket 080
thumbtacks with computer keyboard keys 184
tie, glow-in-the-dark 071
toast 026
toilet-paper dispenser 126
toilet-powered fountain 124
toothbrush, robotic pet made with 063
toothpaste tubes, refilling 242
touchscreens
   for netbook 165
   stylus for 166
   vinyl protector for 167
toy-car broom 112
tripod
   for camera, using plastic cup 206
   for smartphone 164
turntables
   fire tornado using 037
   pizza-box 068
   zoetrope using 043


U
umbrella, solar, for cooking 123
unicycles 222
USB hub, built into desk 189


V
van, bed installed in 238
vehicles
   amphibious 251
   bed installed in 238
   distance sensor for 235
   golf cart powered by truck engine 148
   hot rod converted from logging truck 230
   motorcycle, illuminated with LEDs 228
   motorized dining table 120
   motorized easy chair 264
   taillight masks for 233
   See also bicycles; skateboards
vinyl record, silicone copy of 069
virtual-reality glasses 061


W
water guns 039
water-powered jetpack 047
Watkins, Perry 120
weather balloon, aerial photos using 246
welcome mats, customized 081
welding, how-to 013
Wi-fi antenna, using steamer 156
window blinds, cardboard 140
wind turbine, backyard 144
woodworking, how-to 007, 008, 009, 010
wristband, with magnet inside 129


X
Xbox 360 controller, as smartphone case 158
X-ray machine, portable 195
Z
zoetrope, turntable 043
THANKS TO OUR MAKERS
Lots of inventive people contributed their ideas and
how-to tutorials to the pages of this book. Look
them up to find out more details about their
projects, as well as any new cool stuff they’re up to.
GEEK TOYS
014: John B. Carnett (carnettphoto.com) 015: Elizabeth Hurchalla
and Kent Hayward 019: Kip Kay (kipkay.com) 021: Jamie Price
(jamiepricecreative.com) 023: Scott McIndoe 024: Kyle Pollock
025: Windell H. Oskay (evilmadscientist.com) 026: Alessandro
Lambardi 027 (potato gun): Spudtech (spudtech.com) 027
(pumpkin gun): Gary Arold and John Gill 029: R. Lee Kennedy,
Associate Professor, Department of Drama, University of Virginia
030: Michel Mota da Cruz 031: Bob Munz 033: Mike Andersen,
Grant Elliot, Schyler Senft-Grup, and Scott Torborg
(scotttorborg.com) 034 (Rubens’ tube): Nik Vaughn 034 (fireball
gun): Vin Marshall (te-motorworks.com) 035: Courtesy of
campfiredude.com 039: Courtesy of waterzooka.com 041: Inspired
by a tutorial by Instructables username hunrichs; furthered by
Emelie Griffin 042: Kimanh le Roux (scissorspaperwok.com) 043:
Emelie Griffin 044: Anthony Le (masterle247.wix.com) 047
(jetpack): Raymond Li (jetlev-flyer.com) 050: Harout Markarian
051: Daniel Wolf (cookrookery.com) 052: Jason Wilson 053:
Robert Waters 054: Eddie Zarick 055 (LEGO pinball): Gerrit
Bronsveld and Martijn Boogarts 056: Joshua Zimmerman
(browndoggadgets.com) 058: A.C. Jeong 059: Michael Nagle 061:
Andrew Lim (cofounder of Recombu.com) 062: Aram Bartholl
(deaddrops.com) 065: Bard Lund Johansen 066: Lindsay Lawlor
(electricgiraffe.com) 067: Inspired by Kang Chang, Kyle Milns, and
Mike Fleming; further developed by Ian Cannon 068: Courtesy of
illphabetik.com 073: Tim Lillis 074: Michael Greensmith
(steampunkwayoflife.blogspot.com.au) 078: Maayan Migdal
(created at the Bezalel Academy of Art and Design, under
professors Ytai Ben-Tsvi, Shachar Geiger, and Itay Galim) 080
(theremin): Dave Prochnow 080 (lasers): Stephen Hobley
(stephenhobley.com)

HOME IMPROVEMENTS
081: Jeni Rodger (jenirodger.com) 082: Brian Jewett 085: Ben
Katz (build-its.blogspot.com) 086: Kip Kay (kipkay.com) 093: Dave
Prochnow 094 (wearable LED TV): David Forbes 099 (graffiti
laser): Chris Poole 100: Eric Dyer and Maggie Hoffman
(radiohole.com) 102: David Prochnow 105: Daniel Julian 106:
Jared Bouck (inventgeek.com) 111: Damon Hearne 118: Dave
Prochnow 120: Perry Watkins (perrywinklecustoms.co.uk) 123:
Juan Francisco Paredes 124: Patrick Lalonde 125: Dan Poff
(tophatlabs.wordpress.com) 129: Ben Diaz 131: Dave Prochnow
134: Scott McIndoe 140: Melanie Rapp Mimikry 141: John B.
Carnett (carnettphoto.com) 142: Merijn van Wouden 143: Dean
Segovis (hackaweek.com) 144: Ed Lenz (windstuffnow.com) 145:
Dave Prochnow 148 (lawnmower): Korey Atterberry
(atterberry.net) 148 (golf cart): Bill Rulien
(beavercreekgolfcarts.com) 149: Dave Prochnow 151: Kai Grundt

GADGET UPGRADES
152: William Finucane (adapted with permission from his original
guide in the Mad Science World on wonderhowto.com) 157:
Wallace Kineyko 161: Dave Prochnow 162: Dylan Hart
(householdhacker.com) 167: Jennifer Lee
(jen7714.wordpress.com) 169: Adapted from More Show Me How
170: Windell H. Oskay (evilmadscientist.com) 172: Instructables
username unclesam 173: Ian Cannon 175: Phil Herlihy
(braindeadlock.net) 176: Jeffrey Davies 178: Dave Fortin
(failsworld.com) 180: TomaDimov (outfab.com) 181: Bard Lund
Johansen 185: Ian Cannon 186: Jani “Japala” Pönkkö (editor of
metku.net) 188: Ingo Schommer (chillu.com) 190: Pamela
Stephens (pbjstories.com) 195 (portable X-ray machine): Adam
Munich 196: Bionerd23 (youtube.com/user/bionerd23) 197
(plasma globe): Burak Incepinar (tacashi.tripod.com) 197 (DIY
SEM): Ben Krasnow (youtube.com/user/bkraz333) 199: Kip Kay
(kipkay.com) 201: Markus Kayser (markuskayer.com) 204: Chris
Barnardo 208: Larry Towe (getawaymoments.com) 214: Dave
Prochnow 215: Darren Samuelson (darrensamuelson.com)

THINGS THAT GO
227 (fan-propelled skateboard): Ryan Bavetta 227 (motorized
skateboard): John B. Carnett (carnettphoto.com) 229: Ian Cannon
230: Randy Grubb 235: William Finucane (adapted with
permission from his original guide in the Mad Science World on
wonderhowto.com) 238: Allison Button
(modmischief.blogspot.com) 240: Dave Prochnow 242: Adam
Stetten 244: Alan Chatham (unojoy.com) 246: Public Laboratory
for Open Technology and Science (publiclaboratory.org) 248: Dave
Prochnow 251: Stan Hewitt 252: Ari Horowitz 255: Claude Siset
(synergyparamotors.com) 258 (batting machine): Frank Barnes
(robocross.de) 259: Conor Buckley 261: Hoon Oh (hoon-oh.com),
Robb Godshaw (robb.cc), and Jisu Choi (jisuchoi.com) 264: Chris
McIntosh
IMAGE CREDITS
All images courtesy of Shutterstock Images unless otherwise
noted.
Courtesy of the Popular Science Archives: 49, 57, 79, 83, 104,
119, 147, 160, 213, 249, 257.
Chris Barnardo: 204 Ryan Bavetta: 227 (photograph of
skateboard) Luis Bruno: 100, 102, 131, 149 Conor Buckley: 15,
22, 24–26, 27 (potato gun illustration), 28–32, 34 (Rubens’ tube
illustration), 39–43, 45, 47 (roller coaster illustration), 48, 55
(Nintendo belt illustration), 56, 58–65, 67–69, 75–76, 78, 81, 84–
86, 88–93, 94 (gaming chair), 99, 101, 103, 107–109, 111–116,
118, 121–126, 132–133, 135, 142–144, 146, 148 (lawnmower
photograph), 150, 152, 159, 162–167, 172–177, 180, 183–186,
193–194, 196, 198–200, 202–203, 206–208, 214, 221–225, 228–
229, 235–242, 247–248, 250, 259, 262 John B. Carnett: Back
cover (firegun photograph), 14, 21, 27 (pumpkin gun photograph),
33, 34 (firegun photograph), 141, 145, 148 (golf cart photograph),
151, 161, 215, 227 (motorized skateboard photograph), 251, 258
(baseball photograph) Luke Copping: 195 (portable
X-ray machine photograph) Scott Erwert: Front cover, 87, 106,
158, 178–179, 181, 195, 197 (plasma globe photograph), 220,
243–246, 258 (mini-golf course photograph), 260, 263 Hayden
Foell: 153 Getty Images: 80 (Léon Theremin photograph)
Michael Greensmith: 74 JP Greenwood: 66 Jeannette Grubb:
230 Stephen Hobley: 80 (laser harp photograph) D.G. Hubbard:
47 (Jetflyer photograph) Dan Julian: 105 Brian Jewett: 82
Theron Kirkman: 99 (graffiti laser photograph) Timothy Lillis:
192 Scott McIndoe: 23, 134 Stephen Meckler: 94 (LED TV vest
photograph) Jeff Newton: 261 Cody Pickens: 197 (electron-
scanning microscope photograph), 264 Amos Field Reid: 201
Tyler Stableford: 44 Nik Vaughn: 34 (Rubens’ tube photograph)
Carl Wiens: Back cover (mint-tin guitar illustration, steamer
illustration, aquarium illustration, air freshener illustration), 16–19,
35–38, 50–53, 70–73, 95–98, 127–130, 137–140, 154–157, 168–
171, 188–191, 209–212, 216–219, 231–234, 252–255 Jonathon
Worth: 120 Eddie Zarick: 54
DISCLAIMER
The information in this book is presented for an adult audience
and for entertainment value only. While every piece of advice in
this book has been fact-checked and where possible, field-tested,
much of this information is speculative and situation-dependent.
The publisher assumes no responsibility for any errors or
omissions and makes no warranty, express or implied, that the
information included in this book is appropriate for every individual,
situation, or purpose. Before attempting any activity outlined in
these pages, make sure you are aware of your own limitations and
have adequately researched all applicable risks. This book is not
intended to replace professional advice from experts in
electronics, woodworking, metalworking, or any other field. Always
follow all manufacturers’ instructions when using the equipment
featured in this book. If the manufacturer of your equipment does
not recommend use of the equipment in the fashion depicted in
these pages, you should comply with the manufacturer’s
recommendations. You assume the risk and full responsibility for
all of your actions, and the publishers will not be held responsible
for any loss or damage of any sort—whether consequential,
incidental, special, or otherwise—that may result from the
information presented here. Otherwise, have fun.
President, CEO Terry Newell
VP, Sales Amy Kaneko
VP, Publisher Roger Shaw
Senior Editor Lucie Parker
Project Editors Emelie Griffin, Jess Hemerly
Creative Director Kelly Booth
Designer Michel Gadwa
Image Coordinator Conor Buckley
Production Director Chris Hemesath
Production Manager Michelle Duggan

415 Jackson Street, Suite 200
San Francisco, CA 94111
Telephone: 415 291 0100
Fax: 415 291 8841
www.weldonowen.com
Popular Science and Weldon Owen are divisions of

Copyright © 2012 Weldon Owen Inc.

All rights reserved, including the right of reproduction in whole or in
part in any form

Library of Congress Control Number is on file with the publisher.

Digital Edition ISBN 978-1-61628-946-1
Print Edition ISBN 978-1-61628-399-5




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Weldon Owen would like to thank Katie Cagenee, Andrew Jordon,
Katharine Moore, Gail Nelson-Bonebrake, Jenna Rosenthal, Katie
Schlossberg, and Marisa Solís for their editorial expertise and design
assistance.
We’d also like to thank our technical editors, Michael Rigsby and Tim
Lillis, and our in-house builder and circuity diagram consultant, Ian
Cannon.

Popular Science would like to thank Matt Cokeley, Todd Detwiler,
Kristine LaManna, Stephanie O’Hara, Thom Payne, and Katie Peek
for their support over the years.
We would also like to thank Gregory Mone for penning the You Built
What?! entries included in this book.
And a big thanks to Mark Jannot and Mike Haney—the How 2.0
column’s first editor—for getting it all started.
