Copyright © 2017 by James Kakalios
All rights reserved.
Published in the United States by Crown, an imprint of the Crown Publishing Group, a
division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York.
crownpublishing.com
CROWN is a registered trademark and the Crown colophon is a trademark of Penguin
Random House LLC.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Kakalios, James, 1958– author.
Title: The physics of everyday things : the extraordinary science behind an ordinary day /
      James Kakalios.
Description: First edition. | New York : Crown Publishers, [2017] | Includes bibliographical
      references.
Identiﬁers: LCCN 2016046355 | ISBN 9780770437732 (hardcover) | ISBN 0770437737
      (hardcover) | ISBN 9780770437749 (ebook) | ISBN 0770437745 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Physics—Miscellanea. | Science in popular culture.
Classiﬁcation: LCC QC75 .K175 2017 | DDC 530—dc23 LC record available at
      https://lccn.loc.gov/2016046355
ISBN 9780770437732
Ebook ISBN 9780770437749
Illustrations by Peter Arkle, except on this page by Gene Ha
Cover design by Tal Goretsky
Cover photographs (toaster, bread): GS/Gallery Stock
v4.1
ep
            To
 Geoﬀ and Camille Nash
           and
     Augusta Peterson
            for
showing me that every day
   can be extraordinary
                             Contents
Cover
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication

  Chapter One: You Begin Your Day
  Chapter Two: You Drive into the City
  Chapter Three: You Go to the Doctor
  Chapter Four: You Go to the Airport
  Chapter Five: You Take a Flight
  Chapter Six: You Give a Business Presentation
  Chapter Seven: You Go to a Hotel
Acknowledgments
Notes
Figure Captions
About the Author
                              CHAPTER ONE




                         You Begin Your Day



It is early morning, and you’re asleep in bed. Your slow, regular
breathing and steady pulse mark the passage of time, bringing you
closer to when you must get up and begin your day. Today will be a
busy one, with a visit to the doctor followed by a ﬂight to another city
for a business presentation. The vintage clock on your wall, a gift from
your grandmother, provides a comforting tick, tock as the small bob
hanging from the body swings rhythmically back and forth. Although
the clock keeps good time, you rely on the alarm setting of your
smartphone to wake you. But the ﬁrst sensation that will register the
start of your day will not be your hearing; it will be your sense of smell.
Last night you set the digital timer on your coﬀeemaker to start its
brewing cycle ten minutes before your phone’s alarm will go oﬀ. Your
room soon ﬁlls with the aroma of fresh coﬀee, and you begin to stir.
                                      —
   The elegant physics of an oscillating pendulum underlies the working of
both the clock on the wall and the electronic timer on your coﬀeemaker, and
plays a crucial role in many of the devices you will use as you prepare for the
day.
   A pendulum is a very simple device, consisting of a string, ﬁxed at one end,
with a mass, termed the “bob,” attached at the other end. The oscillations of
the pendulum bob provide visual conﬁrmation of one of the most important
concepts in physics, that of the principle of conservation of energy: “kinetic
energy,” the energy of motion, can only be converted to “potential energy”
(the energy associated with a force acting on an object and the distance over
which that force can cause motion) and vice versa. In a pendulum, you can
increase the potential energy of the mass on the string by lifting it up, rotating
the bob to a higher level while keeping the string taut, doing work against the
gravity that pulls down on the bob. Once you release the bob, its potential
energy is converted into kinetic energy as it moves in an arc of a semicircle.
As the bob swings to the other side, the kinetic energy is converted back into
potential energy. Both the starting height and the ﬁnal height at the other end
of the arc are the same—when you release the mass and don’t push it, it can
never rise to a greater height than where it started.
   A pendulum is useful for keeping time. The time it takes for the bob to
complete a full cycle as it swings back and forth does not depend on how
heavy the weight is, or on how high the mass is lifted to start it swinging (at
least, for relatively small excursions back and forth). The greater the height of
the mass, the larger the arc as it swings back and forth, and the larger the
kinetic energy and speed it will have at the bottom of its arc. The longer
distance and the faster speed exactly balance out, so that the time it takes to
complete a cycle is the same—regardless of how high the bob is raised. The
only factor that controls the time for a cycle is the length of the string. A
pendulum whose string is just a little less than ten inches long will take one
second to complete a full oscillation. As it swings, some of the kinetic energy
of the bob is transferred to the surrounding air, pushing the molecules out of
the bob’s way. A careful audit will ﬁnd that the gain in kinetic energy of the
air is exactly equal to the reduction of the total energy of the pendulum,
which is why mechanical clocks—grandfatherly and otherwise—need
periodic winding.
   It’s as true for the digital timer on the coﬀeemaker as it is for the
mechanical pendulum—to mark the passing of time, one needs a power
supply (as everything, even counting seconds, requires a source of energy)
and a way to convert that energy into a periodically varying cycle. The
coﬀeemaker is plugged into an outlet connected to an external electric power
grid. Conveniently for us, the mechanism by which electric power is
generated at a power plant automatically leads to an electric current that
oscillates back and forth like a pendulum that can be exploited when making
a timer.
   Your electric company rotates coils of wire between the poles of large
electromagnets, and to see how that leads to an alternating electric current,
let’s return to the simple mechanical oscillating pendulum. Let the bob at the
end of the string have an electric charge, say from a few extra electrons sitting
on it. Even if this pendulum has a frictionless pivot point and is swinging in a
perfect vacuum, with no air drag, it will eventually slow down and come to
rest. Where did the bob’s energy go? Into electromagnetic waves,
demonstrating a profound symmetry between electric and magnetic ﬁelds that
will be exploited repeatedly throughout your day.
   An “electric current” is deﬁned as the motion of electric charges moving
together, and as the electrically charged bob swings back and forth, changing
its speed, it is a constantly changing current. The current is large at the
bottom of the arc, when the bob is moving at its fastest, and the current is
zero at the top of the arc, when the bob is momentarily stationary. Moving
electric charges, as in a current, generate a magnetic ﬁeld (this is known as
Ampere’s law); the faster they move, the larger the magnetic ﬁeld. The
swinging bob, creating a constantly changing current, generates an equally
varying magnetic ﬁeld. In turn, this changing magnetic ﬁeld generates a
varying electric ﬁeld (known as Faraday’s law). This rhythmic oscillation of
electric and magnetic ﬁelds is termed an “electromagnetic wave,” which will
have the same frequency as that of the oscillating bob. These waves carry
energy, and thus it takes energy to create them. This is why the oscillations of
an electrically charged bob will slowly die out, as its energy of motion is
converted into electromagnetic waves. We could see these electromagnetic
waves with the naked eye if the pendulum were swinging back and forth very
rapidly (say, a thousand trillion times a second), in which case these waves
would appear as visible light.
                                    FIGURE 1


   The power company employs the basic physics of electromagnetism when
it generates the electric voltage available from the wall outlet, using coils of
wire rotating between the poles of a magnet. The voltage provided by your
electric company alternates smoothly from a positive voltage to a negative
voltage, and back again, forming a wave that is mathematically identical to
the variation in position of the pendulum bob as it oscillates back and forth,
and is a natural consequence of how the electricity is produced. (This is why
our electric power is called AC, for “alternating current.”) The power plant is
applying Faraday’s law, which describes how a changing magnetic ﬁeld will
generate a voltage. As the coil turns, the magnitude of the magnetic ﬁeld
passing through the circular area of the coil varies, and a voltage is generated
that sets up a current in the coil.*1 Think of the coil as a spool of thread with
a very large diameter. When the area of the coil is facing the poles of the
magnet, most of the magnetic ﬁeld passes through it (along the length of the
spool), but when it rotates by ninety degrees, hardly any of the ﬁeld passes
through the coil’s area. A uniform rotation speed yields a smoothly varying
voltage that changes back and forth in time, just like the motion of the
pendulum bob. In the United States, the coils rotate sixty times a second,
which is the frequency of the alternating voltage that is generated.
   The fact that the voltage in the wall outlet varies smoothly back and forth
sixty times a second means that it takes only 0.0167 second to complete one
cycle. To slow this period down to one second, the coﬀeemaker’s timer uses
specially designed chips that shift the frequency of the alternating voltage.*2
One chip divides the incoming frequency by ten, so a voltage wave that
oscillates sixty times a second now does so six times a second. Another chip
divides this frequency by an additional factor of six, so the frequency of six
cycles per second is reduced to one cycle per second. This slower voltage
wave is sent to another chip, which counts the number of times the voltage
has its largest positive value (equivalent to watching how often the pendulum
bob returns to its original starting position). This “counting” chip monitors
the passing seconds, and with a little amount of additional circuitry, this
information can be displayed on a digital clock. When you set the timer on
your coﬀeemaker, you are instructing a chip to monitor this counting chip,
and when the sum reaches a certain value (the time you speciﬁed for the
coﬀeemaker to turn on), it sends another voltage to another part of the
electronic system. This voltage is the same as the one created when you press
the ON switch manually, and the brewing process begins.
   The system for measuring time begins when we plug in the coﬀeemaker
and set the correct time. If the coﬀeemaker is unplugged, then this preset is
lost. So how does an electronic timer work when it is not connected to the
external alternating-current power from the wall outlet?
The coﬀee vapors waft into your room and are recognized by your still-
not-fully-awake mind. In addition to setting the timer on the
coﬀeemaker last night, you set the alarm clock on your smartphone.
The alarm goes oﬀ, playing a preset tune stored in the phone’s
memory chip. You grumble as you check the time, because it is
earlier than you normally need to get up. You are tempted to tap the
alert marked SNOOZE. But as you inhale the coﬀee aroma, you notice
your packed overnight bag sitting in the corner of your bedroom.
Reminding yourself that you have a long day in front of you, you force
yourself out of bed. Getting to your feet, you wince slightly as you put
weight on your left foot. It will be good to get that looked at today.
                                      —
   The problem of keeping time in a device not connected to an external
electrical power supply is an old one; in fact, it predates the existence of
electrical power. Old-fashioned alarm clocks used springs, and when the
hands on the face of the clock reached a set point, a lever would be ﬂipped,
releasing another coiled spring. This other spring would then oscillate a
striker bar between two metal shells, creating a clanging noise loud enough to
wake the dead. The alarm in your smartphone is smaller, and the wake-up
tune is less jarring, but the principle behind its operation is essentially the
same.
   Your smartphone uses something called a piezoelectric crystal to replace
the mechanical spring in an alarm clock. Let’s look at simple springs ﬁrst,
piezoelectric crystals second.
   Springs make for very good timekeepers. Springs resist being stretched or
compressed, and respond with a force that opposes the change in their length.
The more the spring is stretched or compressed, the greater the opposing
force. Hang a coiled spring from the ceiling, and attach a weight to its end.
The spring will stretch down, with the spring providing an upward force,
opposing the stretching and balancing the downward gravitational pull of the
weight. If you pull the weight down a bit more and let it go, the upward force
from the spring is now larger than the downward force of the weight, and the
weight moves upward, speeding past its original position. As the weight
overshoots, it compresses the spring, and the coil responds with a downward
force, now opposing the squeezing and pushing the weight back toward its
starting location. The weight will go up and down periodically, with a motion
no diﬀerent from the swinging pendulum bob and the alternating voltage from
the wall outlet. The natural frequency of the spring’s oscillations (the number
of up-and-down cycles per second) is determined by its stiﬀness and how
much weight is hanging on its end.
   The origin of the force in a spring that resists being stretched or
compressed is the same as in the piezoelectric crystal in your smartphone—
electricity. The atoms in all solids are held together by electric forces, which
also make sure that the atoms stay in speciﬁc locations. If two neighboring
atoms in a solid get too close to each other, there is a repulsive force between
the electrons from each atom that pushes them back apart. Imagine an atom
in a crystal as a simple ball. Let’s represent the chemical bonds holding the
atom in place as springs attached to the atoms on either side. Push this atom
away from its natural position in a solid, and its surrounding electrons will
encroach too closely on its neighbors on one side, and be too far away on the
other. This creates an unbalanced force that will push the atom back toward
its equilibrium position. That force will decrease by the time the atom is back
to its natural spot in the crystal, but due to its kinetic energy it will overshoot
and now move toward the neighboring atom on the other side. It will oscillate
back and forth around its preferred location, with the amplitude of vibration
depending on the solid’s temperature, and the frequency of oscillation
depending on the mass of the atom and the stiﬀness of the chemical bonds
holding it in place in the solid. This vibration of the atoms happens in all
solids: this book, the chair you are sitting in, even you yourself.
   Electronic timekeepers, such as a digital wristwatch and your smartphone,
use a special oscillator that is much more accurate than a coiled spring—a
quartz crystal. Quartz is a solid composed of molecular units of silicon
dioxide, the chemical composition of sand. Quartz crystals have a special
property: the electric charges of the molecular units line up to create a net
electric ﬁeld along the length of the solid when it is squeezed in one direction.
This type of material is called piezoelectric: piezo, in Greek, means “to
squeeze or press,” and a piezoelectric material is a solid that generates a
voltage when it is squeezed. For certain materials and crystal structures, when
two sides of the solid are pushed together, all the atoms buckle in just the
right way to create a large, net electric ﬁeld.
   To use a piezoelectric crystal as a timing device, we run this process
backward. That is, we apply a voltage across the solid, and the crystal sides
pull together, as if compressed by an external force. Once the voltage is
turned oﬀ, the crystal will expand, and it begins to oscillate at its natural
frequency. That frequency is determined by the size and shape of the crystal,
and can range from a few thousand cycles per second to as high as several
hundred million cycles per second. As the quartz crystal oscillates, it
generates a voltage at this same natural frequency that can be used to
maintain the crystal’s vibrations. As in the digital timer, computer chips
reduce the quartz crystal’s high frequency down to one cycle per second.
Once the preset time is reached, a signal voltage is sent to another chip. In the
coﬀeemaker, this second chip starts the brewing process for the coﬀee, while
in your phone it initiates playing a preselected musical tune.
   Timing is very important for a smartphone, aside from any alarm clock
functions. Any procedure by a computer (and for our purposes, the
smartphone can be considered a small computer) is an operation that exists in
time. There is a start to the process, and an end—not unlike a piece of music.
Moreover—again, not unlike a piece of music—in order to achieve the
desired eﬀect, the notes have to play in the appropriate sequence, at the right
time. For a symphony orchestra to be eﬀective, the musicians need a good
conductor who will stay on beat and ensure that, for example, the horns don’t
begin playing the fourth movement while the strings are tuning up. In a
computer, with millions of transistors, logic elements, and memory cells that
all have to perform in the right sequence, the “musical conductor” is a chip
called the central processing unit, or CPU. With the help of a crystal
oscillator, the CPU is able to keep the beat—and a very fast beat at that—in
order to coordinate elements that switch in less than a nanosecond.


After freshening up, you grab your smartphone from the bedside table
and head to the kitchen. You take a bagel and a stick of butter out of
the refrigerator, and leave them on the counter to warm up. Finding a
podcast you have already downloaded on your phone, you listen as
you begin getting ready for the day. This particular podcast features
proﬁles of renowned makers of violins, contemporaries of Stradivarius.
The program intersperses the biographies of these woodworking
artisans with examples of classical music played on their magniﬁcent
instruments. In order to better appreciate the snippets of music, you
connect your smartphone to two small but rather high-quality
speakers that sit on your countertop.
                                      —
   To play your podcast, or any music stored in its memory, your smartphone
has to convert a numerical code into sound waves, which are changes in the
density (hence pressure) of the air. The ability to store music predates the
electronic era, with simple windup music boxes able to play a brief snippet of
a single tune, and player pianos capable of performing the entire number. The
methods by which they store their information diﬀer greatly, but one thing the
music box, player piano, and smartphone all share is that eventually, in order
for the sound to be heard, there has to be a vibration in the air.
   An MP3 player*3 uses a digital instruction set that mimics how the holes
work in a player piano roll. A player piano has an internal mechanism that
can autonomously instruct which keys to depress, via a roll of paper with
holes strategically arranged. Variations on the holes’ locations and spacing in
this long sheet basically hold a code that, when interpreted by the piano’s
mechanism, will play a particular song. The digital information stored in your
smartphone is also essentially a code that, when read properly, creates a
pattern of voltages. When sent to a speaker, these voltages are converted into
the sound waves of the speciﬁc musical tune. Inside the speaker is a
membrane (a very thin plastic sheet) that can vibrate. Depending on the
frequencies and amplitudes of the membrane’s vibration, pressure waves are
generated in the air—and it’s these waves that we can hear.
   How does one convert electrical voltages into mechanical vibrations of the
membrane so that we can hear the resulting sound waves? It’s done with
magnets. Attached to the membrane is a small coil of wire. A voltage is used
to drive a current through the coil, and any changes in the voltage are
reﬂected in the current. These current changes are converted to mechanical
vibrations on the speaker’s membrane using the same symmetry between
electrical currents and magnetic ﬁelds encountered before. The varying
electrical currents generate varying magnetic ﬁelds. The coil on the
membrane sits right on top of a permanent magnet directly underneath the
diaphragm. When the current ﬂows in a clockwise direction, it generates a
magnetic ﬁeld oriented so that the north pole faces outward, toward the north
pole of the permanent magnet. Because identical polarities repel each other,
there is a force pushing the magnets apart, causing the membrane to ﬂex
outward. When the voltage direction is reversed, the current ﬂows in the
opposite direction (counterclockwise), and the magnetic ﬁeld generated has a
south pole facing the permanent magnet’s north pole. Opposite magnetic
polarities attract, and the coil is pulled toward the permanent magnet, causing
the membrane to distend inward. Changes in the voltage, in both frequency
and amplitude, cause back-and-forth modulations in the membrane, which in
turn generate sound waves.
   An earbud places the vibrating membrane in proximity to the eardrum. For
a conventional stereo system, the speaker’s membrane is at the center of a
larger cone that ﬂares out, amplifying and projecting the membrane’s
vibrations. A smartphone’s speakers are in its case, so the quality and volume
of the music it plays are compromised. (If you want a quick and not-very-
dirty way to amplify the sound from your smartphone speakers, rest the
phone’s speaker on the bottom of a large bowl, preferably one made of wood,
and the sound will have a richer and deeper tone. The natural frequencies of
wood enhance the reﬂected sound waves—making it the material of choice
for string instruments.)


You get caught up in the podcast as it plays a vibrant segment of
music. You imagine the virtuoso rhythmically plying the bow back and
forth across the strings. The image of the bow suddenly reminds you
that you still need to brush your teeth. Turning up the volume, you
dash to the bathroom and remove your electric toothbrush from the
plastic holder that serves as the battery recharger.
                                      —
   To make the bristles move back and forth automatically, your electric
toothbrush employs a small electrical motor, connected to a rechargeable
battery. The conversion of electrical potential energy stored in the battery into
rotational kinetic energy underlies a great deal of the technology we
encounter daily. The battery causes a current to ﬂow in a wire coil in the
motor. The coil is situated between the north and south poles of a small
magnet. The current in the wire creates a magnetic ﬁeld that is repelled from
one pole of the magnet and attracted to the other pole, twisting the coil. The
coil is attached to a rod passing through its diameter, and when it twists, the
rod rotates. By using a clever switching mechanism, the battery’s direct
current (DC, as opposed to the AC from the wall outlet) can be made to
change direction every half-turn, so that the coil is continually being repelled
by one pole of the ﬁxed magnet and attracted to the other pole. Through an
oﬀ-center rod, the toothbrush’s internal motor’s rotational motion is
converted to a back-and-forth motion—causing the toothbrush bristles to
oscillate against your teeth.
   The motor in some electric toothbrushes spins at a rate of several hundred
revolutions per second, and this is the source of the hum you hear when
cleaning your teeth. Some toothbrushes can have frequencies as high as 1.6
million cycles per second (but with very low amplitude oscillations). These
high-frequency vibrations are created using frequency multipliers (just as we
saw in the digital timer) and a piezoelectric crystal (found in the timer in your
smartphone).
   The source of electrical energy in your toothbrush is a battery that uses a
chemical reaction to pile positive charges up on a metal bar (called an
electrode) and negative charges on a diﬀerent electrode. This charge
diﬀerence drives the current through the coil in the motor (or gets the
piezoelectric quartz crystal oscillating). The chemical reaction eventually
reaches a point where no more charges can be added to the electrodes. In
rechargeable batteries a voltage is applied across the terminals, forcing the
chemical reaction to run in the opposite direction. With the battery reset, the
forward chemical reaction can again continuously charge up the electrodes,
and the battery is once more ready for action.
   But how to electrically connect the batteries to a power source in a device
that, by its very design, will be near or submerged in water? Many electric
toothbrushes have a plastic handle, which is placed in a cylindrical recharger
that—while connected to an electrical wall outlet—is also solid plastic.
Plastic is an electrical insulator; the electrons in each atom are devoted to
holding the atoms together, and no electrons are available to carry a current in
response to an external voltage. So how does a plastic-to-plastic connection
from the recharger to the handle of the toothbrush supply electrical energy to
the rechargeable battery? Through the same physics that describes how
changing magnetic ﬁelds create electrical currents.
   In the base of the toothbrush’s recharger is a wire coil. When the recharger
is connected to the wall outlet, an alternating current ﬂows through the coil.
This current continually reverses itself, ﬂowing clockwise and then
counterclockwise like the back-and-forth motion of a pendulum. The
magnetic ﬁeld generated by this current will also continually change direction,
ﬁrst with a north pole facing out from the bottom of the charger and then, in
the next half-cycle, a south pole facing outward. The base of the electric
toothbrush contains another coil, oriented so that the magnetic ﬁeld of the
recharger (or most if it) will pass through the circular area of this loop of
wire. The strength and the orientation of the magnetic ﬁeld passing through
this second coil are always changing, thereby inducing a current through the
same mechanism used to generate electrical power at a power plant. This
current in the toothbrush’s coil, set in motion by the process of magnetic
induction, is converted from an alternating current to a direct current, and
then used to recharge the battery in the appliance. A device in which the
current in one coil induces a current in a second coil, even though the coils
are not directly connected, is called a “transformer” and has many uses—not
just recharging the battery in your electric toothbrush.
   If the coil in the recharger has the same number of turns (like the winding
of thread on a spool) and the same diameter as the coil in the base of the
electric toothbrush, then the current induced in the toothbrush coil will be the
same as the current that ﬂows in the ﬁrst coil (assuming that all of the
magnetic ﬁeld from the recharger coil passes through the coil in the
toothbrush base). But if the second coil has more or fewer turns, then the
current induced will be smaller or larger, respectively, than in the ﬁrst coil.*4
This is advantageous, as the alternating current coming from the wall outlet
has a peak value of 110 Volts, which is too large to send to the battery in the
toothbrush. Transformers are used all the time either to boost the voltage in
power lines to improve the transmission eﬃciency or to decrease the voltage,
when the power line reaches your house, to a safer, lower voltage of 120
Volts, suitable for the appliances on your kitchen countertop.


Back in the kitchen, you slice your bagel into two halves. You place
each half into the toaster, and depress the lever. The spring inside
the toaster that holds the slices up is compressed, and the bagel
withdraws into the toaster, where the wires begin to warm, eventually
glowing red. The butter is still a bit hard, so you put it in the butter dish
and place the dish atop the toaster’s openings; the heat will make the
butter softer and easier to spread.
                                       —
   The toaster is a technology that would be familiar to your great-
grandparents. When you put a piece of bread in a toaster and push the lever
arm down, in addition to lowering the slice into the toaster, you are also
closing a circuit that allows an electrical current to ﬂow through the wires
adjacent to the bread. After half a minute or so, the wires become warm and
then begin to glow red-hot. Why? To understand how the toaster converts
electrical energy into heat and light requires an understanding of
thermodynamics, electromagnetism, and quantum mechanics. All for a piece
of toast!
   A toaster employs the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, which states that for
any closed system, the total amount of work and heat must remain
unchanged. When you close the circuit by pressing down on the lever, the
current is forced through the wire, and thanks to the resistance in the wire,
the electrical current’s energy is converted into heat.
   Let’s start with the metal wire itself. To be a good conductor of electricity,
a material needs a large number of electrical charges that are free to move.
Metals have a large density of mobile electrons and thus make excellent
carriers of electrical current, while insulators like plastic or glass have their
electrons tied up in the chemical bonds between atoms. The arrangement and
detailed chemical interactions of atoms in a solid, subject to quantum
mechanical constraints, determine whether any given material is an insulator
or a conductor.
   Toaster wire is usually composed of an alloy of nickel and chromium
(called nichrome), both metals that can carry an electrical current. For
quicker toast, the wire should be a good conductor of electricity—but not too
good. It’s the mixing of two diﬀerent metals in the nichrome wire, along with
any other defects or imperfections, that will lead to the desired heating.
   Think of the wire in a toaster as a large staircase with a throng of people
all trying to descend at the same time. The more people exiting at the bottom
of the stairs, and the faster they are moving, the greater the current. The
voltage, which here would be the steepness of the stairs, is what gets people
moving down in the ﬁrst place. A very steep angle would translate to a large
voltage, meaning a single person would exit the bottom of the staircase with a
greater speed. The individual steps correspond to the atoms in the metal. It’s
easier to descend the staircase, especially when you are part of a large group,
by having everyone line up across the width of the staircase and move down,
step by step, in unison. As one row exits at the bottom, another starts oﬀ at
the top—allowing the staircase to achieve its peak eﬃciency.
   However, people in a staircase, like electrons in a wire, move somewhat
randomly rather than marching in lockstep. Moreover, real staircases (and
real wires) are not so uniform. If there is a step missing (in a wire this might
be an atom out of place, for example) that no one notices until they try to
walk onto it, there would be a large tumble. All of this leads to ineﬃciency,
and the whole journey takes longer—which (in toaster-wire terms) translates
to a lower current.
   In a metal, this is characterized as contributing to the wire’s “resistance.”
There are geometric contributions to resistance, as it’s harder to pass a
current through long and skinny wires compared to short and fat ones. In
some applications, resistance is a signiﬁcant hindrance. But when making
breakfast, it comes in handy.
   The resistance of the wire leads to a transfer of kinetic energy from the
electrical current to the atoms in the wire, causing them to vibrate more
violently than before, a process known as “Joule heating.”*5 This is why
nichrome is used in your toaster—it’s a good enough conductor to carry a
current, but it also has a large resistance, to maximize the Joule heating. With
enough transferred kinetic energy, the atoms near the defect can shake so
violently that they emit light, which is why the toaster wire glows.
   When an atom vibrates, the electrons swing back and forth like a mass on a
spring, forming an electrical current that ﬂuctuates inside the atom. That
electrical current generates a magnetic ﬁeld. As the current is continually
alternating in magnitude and direction, the magnetic ﬁeld is constantly
changing, and the changing magnetic ﬁelds generate electric ﬁelds. Think of
the charged pendulum bob shown on this page. The periodically varying
electric and magnetic ﬁelds combine to form an oscillating electromagnetic
wave called “light.”
   To create that perfectly done piece of toast, the heat of the toaster wire
(which can be over 1,000°F) is transferred to the bread. In hair dryers and
space heaters, air molecules are pushed past the hot wire, picking up excess
kinetic energy, while in the close conﬁnes of a toaster, heating occurs mostly
from infrared radiation. When the surface of the bread is approximately
300°F, sugars and starches undergo a chemical reaction, becoming brown and
changing their ﬂavor and texture. The “toast setting” knob is actually an
adjustable resistor that varies the current in the toaster wires. A timer or
temperature sensor is used to open the electrical circuit and stop this process,
hopefully before your toast burns.


You remove the butter dish from the top of the toaster, just before the
butter melts. A few moments later the bagel pops up, toasted to
perfection. As tempting as it is to relax with your cup of coﬀee, you
have a doctor’s visit to get to. You pour yourself a glass of orange
juice and listen to your podcast while you ﬁnish your breakfast. The
calendar reminder on your phone buzzes to alert you that your
doctor’s appointment is in an hour. You clean oﬀ your plate and rinse
out the juice glass and coﬀee mug, placing them all in the dishwasher,
and return the orange juice bottle and butter to the refrigerator.
                                      —
   A toaster makes use of the ﬁrst law of thermodynamics, in that the work
done forcing a current through a wire is converted into heat. The second law
of thermodynamics places limits on how well we can run this process in
reverse, extracting heat and using it to do work, as in a refrigerator.
   The development of the ﬁeld of thermodynamics subverts the standard
paradigm, in which the basic science research comes ﬁrst and the practical
applications follow. Rather, steam engines—a practical application of a little-
understood science—came ﬁrst, and only later, motivated by the desire to
improve the engine’s eﬃciencies, did scientists ﬁgure out the basic physics.
An engine converts random heat into useful work, as in the burning of
gasoline in an internal combustion engine, while a refrigerator is an engine
run backward, where work is done to remove heat from a system.
   A refrigerator lowers its internal temperature using the same physics you
rely on to cool oﬀ a hot cup of coﬀee by blowing on it—evaporation cooling.
Say your morning cup of coﬀee is too hot to drink. Temperature is a measure
of the average kinetic energy of the molecules in the coﬀee. That is, some
molecules will have a kinetic energy below the average, and some will be
much more energetic. Those more energetic, eager-beaver molecules form the
cloud of steam over your coﬀee cup and have enough kinetic energy to
initiate a phase transition, moving from the liquid state into the vapor phase.
When you blow on your coﬀee, you are pushing these high-kinetic-energy
molecules away from the cup, preventing them from returning to the liquid
and redepositing their energy into the liquid. With those high-energy
molecules no longer part of the coﬀee liquid-vapor system, the new average
kinetic energy of all the molecules is lower than it was before, reﬂected in a
lower temperature for your coﬀee.
   Your refrigerator basically operates on the same principle but uses a
diﬀerent liquid instead of coﬀee. Refrigerators once used Freon but now have
transitioned to tetraﬂuoroethane.*6 An electric motor is used to run a
mechanical pump, which forces the coolant liquid through a thin metal pipe.
Metal is a good conductor of heat (the “sea of free electrons” can carry
energy as well as electrical current), and it ensures a good thermal connection
between the coolant liquid and the walls of the fridge. The pump forces the
coolant through an expansion valve, allowing it to go from the narrow tube
into a larger volume, where it undergoes a phase transition from the liquid to
the vapor state. You have to add energy to a liquid to convert it to a vapor
(consider boiling water), and that energy has to come from somewhere.*7 The
cloud of coﬀee vapor extracts kinetic energy from the rest of the liquid coﬀee
in order to evaporate, while the tetraﬂuoroethane pulls heat away from the
interior walls of the refrigerator. The coolant liquid moves through a tube that
makes a series of S-shaped turns in order to maximize its surface area in
contact with the fridge walls. The density of S-shaped turns is higher in the
freezer section so that more heat is extracted from this volume.
   What to do with the energetic gas once it has removed heat from the
refrigerator? To repeat this process and keep the fridge permanently cool, the
pump is now used to recompress the gas back into a liquid. When the vapor
transitions into the liquid, it gives back the heat it extracted when it went from
the liquid to the vapor. Because it takes energy to run the pump, there is a net
cost of energy in running the refrigerator. The tubes in this part of the closed-
cycle system are placed behind the back of the fridge, next to the wall, so that
they do not return their heat to the interior of the refrigerator. When a
temperature sensor indicates that the desired internal temperature has been
reached, the pump is turned oﬀ. There are thermal leaks at the seals of the
doors to the fridge and freezer, though better engineering and better materials
have improved the quality of these seals. If you leave the door of the fridge
open while staring at the interior contents, contemplating some deep truth of
the universe, you will also cause the interior of the refrigerator to warm. Then
you will hear the compressor of the fridge turn back on.


*1 High-pressure steam is used to turn the coil, and the steam is generated by boiling water
 via the burning of coal or natural gas or biomatter, or through the energy of nuclear
 reactions. Regardless of the fuel they use, all power plants use the same physics to generate
 electricity.
*2 These chips generate beats by adding a second frequency to the ﬁrst signal (a process
 called “heterodyning”). The result is two oscillations, one at a higher frequency that is the
 sum of the two, and another at a lower frequency that is their diﬀerence. Using a ﬁlter, one
 can select for the lower frequency.
*3 This notation is a shorthand to describe the software used to compress the music so that
 fewer ones and zeros are needed for the instructions sent to the speakers.
*4 Electrical power is mathematically described as the product of the current and the voltage,
 and a larger current in the second coil means that the voltage will be smaller. (One is
 constrained, after all, by conservation of energy, and one can’t get more power out of the
 system than one puts in.)
*5 This same physics applies in space heaters and hair dryers.
*6 In 2016, 170 nations agreed to reduce the use of hydroﬂuorocarbons such as
 tetraﬂuoroethane in refrigerators and air conditioners. Alternative coolant ﬂuids can be used
 without changing the basic physics by which a refrigerator operates.
*7 This is also the mechanism by which we cool ourselves when we perspire. Sweat only
 cools when it evaporates, extracting energy from the skin to move from the liquid to the
 vapor state, lowering the average kinetic energy of the body. If the atmosphere is saturated
 with water vapor on a muggy day, then this process is inhibited and we can’t cool oﬀ as
 eﬀectively. So physics says it really is true—it’s not the heat, but the humidity!
                              CHAPTER TWO




                        You Drive into the City



You take the elevator down to the garage of your building. You head
over to your electric/gasoline hybrid vehicle and unlock your car
door using the keyless remote control on your key fob. When you are
settled behind the steering wheel, you start the car and drive to the
exit. You slow down for a moment, and a sensor registers the
electronic key in your car and opens the garage doors.
                                       —
   The automobile is essentially a machine for the conversion of potential
energy into kinetic energy. In an internal combustion engine, the potential
energy is chemical, stored in the gasoline molecules; in an all-electric car, the
potential energy is in an electrochemical battery. A hybrid car uses both an
internal combustion engine and an electric motor, maximizing the advantages
and minimizing the limitations of each process. Vehicles with gas engines can
travel great distances on a single fuel tank, but their mileage is generally poor
and they produce noxious exhausts. Electric cars are clean and eﬃcient, but
they have a limited driving range owing to the relatively poor energy density
of batteries. For driving under normal conditions, a much smaller (and hence
more fuel-eﬃcient) engine would suﬃce. However, this smaller engine would
not be able to provide suﬃcient power for accelerating to highway speeds or
climbing a steep hill. In order for a smaller, more eﬃcient engine to provide
the necessary thrust in those less frequent but crucial situations, a hybrid
automobile calls upon a battery-powered electric motor as a secondary energy
supply. The net result is an automobile that has much better mileage due to its
more eﬃcient engine, without sacriﬁcing acceleration thanks to its electric
motor assist.
   But it does not matter whether the energy that rotates the tires comes from
a battery, a gasoline-fueled internal combustion engine, or even an old-
fashioned steam-driven antique—from a physicist’s perspective, every single
automobile is an all-electric vehicle.
   Normally, atoms are electrically neutral (they have no positive or negative
charge). Electrically neutral atoms will not form chemical bonds with other
atoms—unless the conditions are just right. Bring two atoms very close
together, and their electron orbits will overlap. The negatively charged
electrons will repel each other, keeping the two atoms separate and distinct.
In order to overcome this repulsion, whenever two atoms link up and form a
simple molecule, there must be an additional attractive interaction that
overwhelms the repelling electrons. All bonds between atoms depend on
electrical attractions to hold the atoms together. The bonds between atoms in
a molecule of gasoline, called “covalent bonds,” are generally very strong; it
takes a fair amount of energy to break them. When these molecular fragments
re-form, as in the combustion reaction in an automobile engine, they can
release a similarly large amount of energy.
   Another type of chemical bond, termed “ionic,” is responsible for the
energy stored in a battery. Atoms that have fewer or more electrons than
normal are called “ions”; a “positive ion” has fewer negatively charged
orbiting electrons than positively charged protons in its nucleus, and one with
more electrons than protons is a “negative ion.” Batteries are devices that use
ions to create a voltage. A typical battery employs ions moving between two
metal rods, the “electrodes” or “terminals,” which typically reside in a ﬂuid,
either acidic (such as sulfuric acid) or alkaline (typically potassium
hydroxide),*1 that can strip charges from the atoms in one terminal,
promoting the formation of ions. By choosing the right metals for the
electrodes, and the right chemical ﬂuid, we can induce negatively charged ions
to pile up on one rod and positively charged ions to pile up on the other. A
separating barrier in the ﬂuid keeps these ions on the terminals and prevents
them from recombining and discharging through the ﬂuid. When a wire is
connected across the terminals, this charge diﬀerence pushes the electrons in
the wire away from the negative ions on the one terminal and toward the
positive ions on the other. The net result is that an electrical current ﬂows
through the wire. This electrical current can be used to do mechanical work,
such as powering an electrical motor.
   When the battery is used to drive a current in an electrical circuit, the ions
stored on the electrodes are eﬀectively removed, and the chemical reactions in
the battery ﬂuid can then continue to add negative and positive charges to the
metal rods. But eventually the reactive components of the ﬂuid are used up,
the battery cannot maintain its speciﬁed voltage, and the battery is “dead.”
Fortunately, the batteries in today’s all-electric vehicles are rechargeable.
   Another limitation on a battery’s stored electrical energy is that the metal
terminals can hold only so many charged ions, a major drawback when using
batteries as a sole source of automotive power. Compared to the energy
density of a battery, the energy density stored in the chemical bonds in a
molecule of gasoline can be much higher. The trick is extracting that energy
in a way that leads to tire rotation.
   A standard automobile internal combustion engine generally consists of
four to eight cylinders, in which diﬀerent chemical vapors are injected
through a hose attached to a hole near the top of each cylinder. The cylinder
has rigid side-walls and a ﬁxed top, and a bottom plate (called the “piston”)
that can slide up and down.*2 There are four steps in a combustion cycle, with
the ﬁrst two being the injection of gasoline vapor and oxygen into the
cylinder, followed by the movable piston being forced up, compressing this
gas mixture. The gasoline and oxygen molecules, squeezed into a smaller
volume are now hotter, and have greater kinetic energy. This hotter gas is just
below the temperature at which the gasoline molecules will react with oxygen
and undergo combustion. Step three begins with the input of trigger energy,
in the form of an electrical arc from a spark plug that ignites the hot gasoline
vapor. Chemical bonds in the gasoline molecule are broken and new bonds
form, with the net result that the chemical products have far greater kinetic
energy than they did before the spark. These faster molecules strike the inner
surface of the cylinder, exerting a large pressure and forcing the piston down.
Stage four: the gases (the ignited air/gas mixture and any unreacted gas in the
cylinder) are pushed out as exhaust through another hose, returning the
cylinder to its initial position.
   Internal combustion engines repeat this four-step cycle as we drive our
cars. The up-and-down motion of the piston is converted to rotational motion
of the wheels through a clever mechanical coupling, not unlike that employed
in an electric toothbrush. In the automobile, a rod attached to the top of the
piston is attached to the edge of a disc. As the rod moves up and down, it
causes the disc to spin, and the rotation is transferred to the tires.
   Why does burning gasoline release energy? A gasoline molecule consists of
a chemically connected chain of covalently bonded carbon atoms (typically
seven to eleven), strung together like beads on a bracelet, with hydrogen
atoms chemically bonded to each carbon atom along the chain. A molecule is
stable if its collection of bonded atoms has a lower energy than when they are
physically separated and distinct. This lower binding energy, which results
from quantum mechanical interactions between the electrons in each atom,
holds the covalently bonded molecule together. When energy greater than its
binding energy is supplied to the molecule, it may “unbind” and break into its
constituent pieces; the molecular fragments can then react with other atoms,
forming new molecules. These molecules will be lower in energy than the
separate atomic building blocks, and as they form, moving into lower-
potential-energy conﬁgurations, conservation of energy will speed up the
chemical products (that is, they will have more kinetic energy). This excess
kinetic energy of the reaction products is referred to as “heat.” Diﬀerent
molecules will release diﬀerent amounts of kinetic energy through
combustion. One reason that the four-cycle internal combustion engine
ultimately won out over steam- and electric-powered automobiles at the
beginning of the twentieth century is that gasoline has, pound per pound, one
of the highest energy densities available.
   In some hybrids, the electric motor and the gas-fueled engine operate
simultaneously to provide kinetic energy to the tires. Other hybrids use an
either/or conﬁguration, with the electric motor starting the car and the
internal combustion engine taking over when it’s at cruising speed. Either the
gas-fueled engine runs a generator that recharges the battery, or the battery is
recharged every time the car brakes. In the latter case, the rotational kinetic
energy of the tires is transferred to a generator that maintains the battery’s
charge. Either way, the battery never needs to be externally recharged.


You begin driving down familiar streets and are about to merge onto
the highway you routinely take to work, when that coﬀee ﬁnally kicks in
and you remember that you’re not going into the oﬃce today. You have
accidentally driven in the opposite direction of where you want to go,
away from the doctor’s oﬃce. You are running late, so you consult the
global positioning system built into the dashboard of your car. You
quickly type in your doctor’s address, and in no time the GPS provides
step-by-step instructions to your destination. You pass a series of gas
stations before the entrance ramp of the expressway, and appreciate
that you no longer depend on gas station attendants for directions.
                                         —
   Your GPS device communicates with satellites to determine your exact
location. These particular satellites are in medium Earth orbit, roughly 12,600
miles above the Earth’s surface, and take approximately twelve hours to go
around the planet. There are thirty-two such satellites orbiting Earth,*3 and no
matter where you are, you are within radio contact with at least four of them.
These satellites broadcast radio wave signals at periodic intervals that indicate
the time and their location to any device that has a functioning receiver, such
as your GPS. Your GPS device detects these signals and calculates how long
it took for each of them to arrive, based on when the satellite sent the
message. Knowing the transit time and the speed of the signal (radio waves
are just another form of light, so this speed is the speed of light), your GPS
device checks its position relative to the satellite, and to the signal received
from two other satellite signals. Comparing the three diﬀerent transit times to
the location relative to three orbiting satellites, it is able to accurately pinpoint
your location.*4 Once you know where you are, programmed maps stored in
the device’s memory instruct you how to get where you want to go.
   The better the timing of the signals, the more accurate the determination
of your position. The speed of light is so fast that even small errors in the
timing can yield large errors in the positioning. An object, such as the
satellite, that is far away from a large gravitational mass (the Earth) will have
its clock run a little faster than one on the large mass’s surface. To understand
why gravity will aﬀect the satellite’s clock speed, we must turn to Albert
Einstein’s general theory of relativity, which is a theory of gravity. Whether
you use an onboard navigation system or the locator on your smartphone,
your GPS is accurate thanks to Einstein’s theoretical genius.
   You are familiar with the eﬀects of gravity; you encounter them when you
stand on a bathroom scale. The recorded weight is due to the scale pushing up
to balance the downward gravitational pull of the Earth on your body. If you
were in a closed room in outer space, you would be weightless. But if the
room were to be accelerated by an external force (say, by a cable attached to
the ceiling), then you would no longer ﬂoat in the room; the ﬂoor would
instead push up on you. This acceleration from the cable would thus cause the
scale to display a number. Einstein recognized that there is no way to
determine whether the scale’s reading is due to gravity or due to the cable
providing acceleration, and that therefore the two must be equivalent.
   Gravity results from interactions between masses, and acceleration
describes how we move through space and time. Mass distorts the geometry
of space and time, and this distortion changes our trajectories.
   The Earth has a large mass, and it warps space and time around it. Think
of a thin trampoline sheet, held taut at its edges, onto which one places a
bowling ball. The ball sags down, and the sheet bends around the ball. A
smaller mass (say, an orbiting GPS satellite) moving near the bowling ball
will change its motion as it follows the curvature of the sheet. If the speed of
the smaller ball is chosen correctly, it will follow a circular orbit around the
bowling ball. This orbit can be thought of as a consequence of moving on a
curved surface, or due to a gravitational pull, and Einstein’s theory says that
they are the same thing. To paraphrase theoretical physicist John Archibald
Wheeler, in general relativity, matter tells space how to bend, and space tells
matter how to move.
   There are two eﬀects stemming from relativity that can throw oﬀ the
timing of the highly accurate atomic clocks on the GPS satellites. The
satellites orbiting the Earth cover a distance of over 104,000 miles in only
twelve hours and are traveling at a high velocity relative to you on the surface.
The clocks on the satellites will thus run slower than clocks on the Earth’s
surface—a time dilation eﬀect described by Einstein’s special theory of
relativity.
   And clocks run slower the closer they are to a gravitational mass. To see
why, think about space curved by the Earth’s mass. The distance that light
will travel between two points in a given time period is stretched out when it
is closer to the Earth’s surface. But if light is to cover this longer distance
with the same speed (a central principle of relativity is that the speed of light
in a vacuum is the same everywhere) then time must slow down closer to the
Earth’s surface. That is, the greater the gravitational pull on a clock, the
slower it will run. Knowing the gravitational pull of Earth, one can determine
how much faster the clock on the satellite is running compared to an identical
clock on Earth. The two eﬀects—the satellite’s clock running slower due to
special relativity and it running faster through general relativity—are not
equal and do not fully cancel each other out. The net change is a faster clock
on the satellite from the gravitational eﬀect. If one did not take these small
but measureable time shifts into account and correct for them, GPS systems
would be of dubious value.


You pull onto the expressway, this time heading in the right direction.
You smoothly accelerate down the entrance ramp and merge into a
middle lane. The GPS device on the dashboard indicates that you
need to continue on this road for another four miles, which means that
you will have to pay the highway toll. As you approach the row of
tollbooths, your heart momentarily sinks when you see a series of
brake lights ahead. You are relieved that the slowing down is only for
the two far-right lanes, which are for those drivers who must pay cash
to enter the highway. You glance at the small white box on your
windshield, grateful for the E-ZPass device that automatically pays
your toll. You cruise past an open tollbooth, able to completely bypass
the bottleneck of cars whose drivers are paying their tolls with legal
tender.
                                       —
   The E-ZPass system—along with garage door openers, keyless remote entry
devices, and walkie-talkies used by police, the military, and some emergency
workers—basically relies on specialized radios. One part is a small battery-
powered receiver, like the E-ZPass device in your car, while the analog of the
radio antenna is in the tollbooth. Not unlike a walkie-talkie set, both the car’s
receiver and the tollbooth antenna can broadcast and receive instructions sent
via radio waves. Some E-ZPass systems initiate the receiver/antenna
conversation when the automobile intercepts a light beam that spans the width
of the tollbooth. When the lane is empty, that light beam strikes a
photodetector. But when a car blocks this light by driving through the
tollbooth, the absence of a signal at the photodetector breaks a circuit. This
leads to the closing of another circuit, causing the antenna to send out a signal
to the receiver in the E-ZPass device, beginning a set of radio transmissions
between the tollbooth and your car.
   If E-ZPass systems, garage door openers, and walkie-talkies are all
basically specialized radios, then you might ask: How does a radio work? The
physics behind the generation of radio waves is the same science that
accounts for the toaster wire’s red glow. As the electrons in the toaster wire’s
atoms shake back and forth due to its rising temperature, they create
electromagnetic waves (since changing electric currents create varying
magnetic ﬁelds and, in turn, changing magnetic ﬁelds generate electrical
currents). The toaster wire emits both infrared and red light. Electrons
oscillating at much lower frequencies create radio waves.
   Physicists use the word “light” to describe any electromagnetic wave.
Radio waves, microwaves, infrared light, visible light, ultraviolet light, x-rays,
and gamma rays are all light, diﬀering only in the frequencies of their
oscillating electric and magnetic ﬁelds. The E-ZPass system uses radio waves
with a frequency of 900 MegaHertz (that is, 900 million cycles per second).*5
   When the radio waves emanating from the tollbooth’s antenna encounter
electric charges in a wire in the E-ZPass device, the oscillating electric ﬁeld
will cause the electrons to vibrate back and forth. In the E-ZPass system the
tollbooth and your device both receive and broadcast signals, so which one is
called the “receiver” and which one the “antenna” is arbitrary.
   There are many ways to use these waves to encode information, but two
have dominated: varying the peak heights of the wave, called “amplitude
modulation” (AM), or changing the oscillation frequency, termed “frequency
modulation” (FM). Both require modulations of electric currents more
involved than having a charged mass oscillating back and forth on a spring.
The detected electromagnetic wave in a radio is converted to a voltage that
makes the receiver’s speakers vibrate so that the resulting sound waves mirror
the initial message. The E-ZPass system does away with the speakers, but the
basic process is the same. Information is encoded in the variations of the
radio waves, and there is a back-and-forth communication between the
tollbooth and the device in your car.
                                   FIGURE 2


   Upon receipt of this radio wave signal, the receiver in the E-ZPass device
broadcasts a diﬀerent radio wave signal, identifying the car’s account
information. This digital signal is then sent to a small computer that veriﬁes
the account and checks that there are suﬃcient funds available for the toll.
Another message is sent to a display informing the driver that his or her
account has been appropriately charged. Radio waves, traveling at the speed
of light—186,000 miles per second*6—accomplish all this before the
automobile has progressed even a fraction of an inch through the tollbooth.
While the photodetector records the passage of an automobile, the tollbooth
sends out a signal looking for the E-ZPass. If no responding signal is received,
then another signal is sent to a camera that photographs the car’s license plate.
This will eventually lead to a ﬁne (sometimes delivered by the much-slower-
than-light-speed postal service).


Traﬃc seems to be going at a decent pace, and you begin to wonder
if you might actually arrive early to your appointment. Spotting some
gaps in the traﬃc ﬂow, you switch lanes twice, trying to advance and
make better time. You glance away from the road for an instant and
turn on the radio to check the weather and traﬃc reports. A nice, partly
cloudy day with no signiﬁcant storms or wind—looks like there won’t
be any problems with your ﬂight departure. The traﬃc report is equally
positive, with no reports of any signiﬁcant road construction or
automobile accidents during the morning rush hour. Suddenly you see
a series of brake lights ahead. You quickly step on the brakes to avoid
rear-ending the car in front of you. There is an actual traffic jam that
seems to have popped out of nowhere. You smack the steering
column in frustration, wishing you could levitate over the stopped cars.
                                       —
   As the density of cars per mile of highway increases, the “ﬂux”—that is, the
number of cars passing a given point per hour—will grow. But if the density
of cars becomes too large, the ﬂux actually decreases, and a lower ﬂux
translates to a longer travel time. Physics says that traﬃc would be forever
smooth and easy, if only we could get rid of the drivers.
   When the density of cars on the highway is low, the motion of each one
can be treated independently, its speed set by road conditions but not
constrained by other vehicles. This is not unlike a very dilute gas of atoms,
where the chance of two atoms meeting each other is small. The situation
changes as the density of cars increases, when the motion of cars is more like
the atoms in a liquid, where movement is limited by their interactions with
neighboring atoms. At rush hour, when the density of cars on the road is
highest, you can become stuck in a traﬃc jam that seems to have no obvious
cause. These jams are not always caused by construction or an accident; they
are, in fact, an intrinsic instability of the traﬃc itself.
   For higher car densities, the ﬂow of traﬃc can be described as a collective
phenomenon, not unlike when water molecules interact with other nearby
molecules to form a large-scale disturbance, such as a wave. In the case of
highway traﬃc, when drivers spot a gap in traﬃc ahead, they typically do not
slow down to increase the spacing between their car and those in front of
them, but rather speed up to decrease this separation. Each driver
deliberately, though independently, packs his or her car closer to those ahead,
forming a cluster. As faster cars meet the rear edge of the cluster, they must
slow down; they can speed up again only when they move through the high-
density pack and reach the cluster’s front edge.
   Two factors play a key role in smooth traﬃc ﬂow: your awareness of the
buildup of cars ahead of you, and your response time to any change in the
density of cars. A long response time means that it takes longer for drivers to
respond to changes in density in front of them, and instead of smooth ﬂow,
the clusters will grow larger and larger.
   An analogous situation is a sandpile that is built up by dropping dry grains
of sand on top of each other, until an unstable cone is formed. If one more
grain is added, it can cause an avalanche down the side of the pile. Similarly,
at rush hour, cars pack themselves into ever-growing clusters, and then all
that is needed for a jam to form is one person at the front edge of the pack
tapping on the brakes or just easing oﬀ the gas pedal, slowing down slightly.
This initiates a backward-propagating avalanche of stopped cars that
spontaneously forms a traﬃc jam. Only those cars on the front line are able to
take advantage of the now-lower density of cars ahead of them and accelerate
out of the jam. Those in the middle and back end of the stalled pack must
wait for this leading edge to diﬀuse back to them before they can resume
their journey. Even when the car in front has moved on, the next car does not
instantly start accelerating, as its driver also has a ﬁnite response time. Of
course, while the stopped cars are waiting for the unblocked front edge of the
cluster to reach them, new cars are stopping and joining the jam from the
rear.
   If you were to drive at a steady, uniform speed, keeping pace with the
average ﬂow of traﬃc, then not only would your chances of getting stopped in
a spontaneous jam diminish, but you would actually make it easier for the
drivers following you. By driving at a steady speed and deliberately not
shrinking any gaps, you will avoid joining a dense cluster of cars ahead; and
if a jam does form, you will give it time to evaporate before you reach it. In
essence, you should elect to drop out of the tail end of a traﬃc wave,
smoothing out the density of cars on the road. If all cars drove at the posted
speed limit, or at the same average velocity, then the numbers of cars that a
highway could carry would climb to the theoretical maximum, and you, along
with every other driver, would reach your destination faster.


Your car inches slowly forward; you are completely boxed in on all
sides. It must be an accident, you think, and a pretty bad one, to tie
up traﬃc like this. Looking to the left and right, you cannot see any
emergency vehicles on the shoulders. Finally, the cars in front of you
begin accelerating to highway speed, and you ﬁnd yourself out of the
jam. In another two miles you reach your exit and, continuing to follow
the GPS directions, arrive at your doctor’s building. There is a long
line of cars waiting to enter the pay-parking ramp across the street,
which you’d like to avoid. To your surprise, a car pulls out of a
curbside parking space right on your doctor’s block. It is a tight ﬁt, but
your automobile’s self-parking feature smoothly maneuvers you into
the parking space.
                                     —
  In order to take human miscalculations out of parallel parking, the self-
parking system must know exactly where the car is located relative to other
cars and obstacles.*7 This is not the same as the GPS, for you need a more
granular situational awareness in order to avoid hitting other vehicles. An
onboard computer communicates with the power-steering system, turning the
wheel just so, taking into account the speed with which the car is backing
into the space (this speed is still under the control of the driver in many such
systems). While this feature has only recently become available, the physical
mechanism by which a self-parking car can avoid colliding with other objects
has existed since World War II, with the development of radar and the
proximity fuse.
   The word “radar” is an acronym for radio detection and ranging. Radar
involves the emission of a pulse of electromagnetic waves in the radio portion
of the spectrum that is reﬂected from an object and subsequently detected by
an antenna, measuring distances by the echo technique. In the case of a self-
parking car, a signal pulse is emitted by an antenna/receiver mounted on the
vehicle’s bumper. This pulse is reﬂected from an object and then travels back
to the receiver. By noting the time between the emission of the outgoing
pulse and the receipt of the reﬂected pulse, and knowing the speed of the
signal, you can easily calculate the distance between the car and the object.
Multiple receivers positioned on the car’s front and rear bumpers provide
accurate determinations of its position relative to other automobiles.
However, radio waves have large wavelengths and thus can miss small objects
that may not scatter the waves as eﬀectively as large objects do. Some self-
parking systems thus employ “lidar” (similar to radar but using shorter-
wavelength, visible-light laser beams) or ultrasonics (short wavelength sound
waves) in order to detect pedestrians and other obstructions smaller than a
car.
   The foundation for self-parking (and self-driving) automobiles can be
traced back to the proximity fuse. An important application of radar in World
War II was embedded in antiaircraft artillery that enabled a shell to explode
once it came within a certain distance of its target. Inside the shell was a glass
container ﬁlled with an electrolyte (a ﬂuid that is electrically conductive). The
container would break open due to the violent shaking that occurred during
ﬁring; this closed a circuit that would then emit a radar signal. A separate
circuit in the shell would detect the reﬂected waves, whose signal would grow
stronger as the shell approached its target. Typically, when the shell was
seventy-ﬁve feet from its objective, the reﬂected signal would be strong
enough to induce a voltage to be sent to the triggering charge, exploding the
bomb. As a result, a perfect bull’s-eye wasn’t necessary to damage the target
—important when trying to hit fast-moving targets. Thanks to the radar-
triggered proximity fuse, close could be close enough; and the same physics
also tells you when you are close enough to the cars in front of and behind
you as you parallel park.


Your car has managed to park you snugly in the space, and you try to
hurry to your doctor’s oﬃce, though the pain in your left ankle keeps
you from moving too fast. At the parking kiosk you enter the number
assigned to your parking space, slide a credit card into the reader,
and automatically pay for the street parking. You accept the charges,
and the machine prints out a paper receipt, indicating in bold, large
type the time you need to be back. Heading back to your car, you
grab your tablet and lock your car using the keyless remote control.
                                      —
   Your remote entry system for your automobile operates as a one-way E-
ZPass. When you press the lock or unlock button, your keyless entry fob
sends a radio signal to a receiver in your automobile that then operates the
power locks in the doors (or even starts the vehicle). The receiver in your car
detects the radio signal sent from the fob using the same physics underlying a
radio tuner: resonance.
   We live in a sea of electromagnetic waves, from sources as far away as the
sun (which sends us light of all frequencies, those of greatest intensity being
in the narrow frequency slice we call “visible light”) to sources as near as the
infrared light emitted by our own bodies. We typically never think about all
the electromagnetic waves around us, except when we can’t get enough bars
on our mobile phone to make a call. A radio tuner, or the receiver in your
remote entry system, must be able to ignore all of these frequencies, except
for the particular one corresponding to the station you have selected. It does
this by using a “tuning fork” as a receiver.
   A tuning fork consists of a long piece of metal bent into a U-shape. When
struck, the two long sides of the U-bar vibrate at one particular frequency,
creating pressure waves in the air. The tuning fork thus converts a rapid, one-
time mechanical disturbance into sound at the unique frequency of the fork.
Changing the length, mass, or shape of the bars in the fork will change the
frequency of sound it emits. Another way to get the bars of the tuning fork to
vibrate is to expose them to sound waves at the exact natural frequency of the
fork. Any other frequency won’t cause the tines of the tuning fork to hum.
This phenomenon, where you excite an oscillator at its natural frequency, is
called “resonance.”
   Your radio tuner and the remote entry receiver in your automobile (or in
your garage door opener or E-ZPass system) use the same principle in order
to home in on the one frequency that is relevant, and disregard the
background sea of other electromagnetic waves. The electronic circuitry is
more complex than a simple pendulum or tuning fork (though in the
hierarchy of electronics, the radio tuner circuit is actually rather simple), but
it functions essentially the same way. When an electromagnetic wave is
detected at the selected natural resonant frequency of the circuitry, a much
larger voltage is induced than for any other frequency, and this larger voltage
is then sent to the rest of the system, which processes the information
encoded in the electromagnetic wave. To change the resonant frequency of a
pendulum, you can change the length of the string, while changing the size
and shape of a piezoelectric quartz crystal changes its natural frequency.
When you change the radio station, an alteration of the receiver’s circuitry
varies the resonant frequency of the radio tuner.
   All automobile remote entry systems in the United States use the same
radio wave frequency of 315 MegaHertz. Since all systems use the same
frequency, security relies on knowing the right randomly selected twelve-digit
code that is sent at the same time as the procedural command. Only if the
receiver detects the correct code number will it follow through with the other
signal sent (by opening the trunk or locking the car doors, for example).
   Couldn’t someone with a receiver pick up the signal from your remote
entry fob (just as two radios can listen to the same station) and thus intercept
this twelve-digit code number? They could, but the next time you use your
remote entry fob, a diﬀerent twelve-digit number is used as a password. So
using the last twelve-digit code won’t help you open the car door. The
receiver knows to accept this new twelve-digit number because the
mathematical formula that your fob uses to generate it is the same one used in
the receiver, and they both started oﬀ with the same “seed.” Thus, only one
unique twelve-digit number will be recognized by the receiver. The next time
you press the remote entry fob, it generates a new twelve-digit number, using
the last twelve-digit value as the seed. Intercepting one signal will thus not
enable you to open the car a second time.
   What if you accidentally press the fob when you are far away from your
automobile, so that the receiver in the car does not know that the twelve-digit
password has been updated? For just such a case, the receiver also scans the
next 256 twelve-digit numbers the algorithm would generate, in order to ﬁnd
the right one.


*1 Elements from the ﬁrst column of the Periodic Table of Elements, such as lithium,
 sodium, and potassium, are termed “alkali metals”; alkaline batteries use such elements to
 facilitate the transfer of ions.
*2 In some conﬁgurations the bottom is the ﬁxed cap and the top is the movable piston, but
 this changes nothing in the physics of the four-stroke cycle.
*3 This refers to the U.S. system, which is shared with other countries. However, in order not
 to rely on America, China has recently deployed its own network of positioning satellites.
*4 Each satellite in essence generates a circle, and your receiving device can be anywhere on
 its circumference. The three circles from the three satellites overlap and cross, and where
 they all intersect will be your location (the only point where you can be on the
 circumference of the three circles simultaneously).
*5 This is the same frequency that many cordless landline phones use. But there is no risk of
 interference with your phone at home, as the E-ZPass system is low-power and thus has a
 very short range.
*6 This is the speed in a vacuum. The speed of light can be slower in other media, such as
 water or glass—which we’ll return to later on.
*7 While many would resist handing over the driving of their car to an onboard computer
 navigation system, I for one welcome our robot overlords taking over the task of parallel
 parking.
                             CHAPTER THREE




                          You Go to the Doctor



You enter the high-rise building where your doctor’s oﬃce is located
and head over to the elevator bank. The oﬃce is on one of the top
ﬂoors, and you are concerned about additional delays. But soon,
quicker than you anticipated, the elevator arrives. You feel a
momentary heaviness as the high-speed elevator begins its rapid
ascent to your ﬂoor.
                                       —
   An elevator is essentially a pulley, with a cable that loops over a cylindrical
drum. One end of the cable is aﬃxed to the elevator car and the other to a
counterweight. The size of the counterweight is chosen to reﬂect the weight of
the car with its average occupancy, typically 40 percent of the maximum
capacity of the car. By making the counterweight as close as possible to the
weight of the car, we minimize the energy needed to raise or lower the
elevator car.
   Think about a see-saw. It is much easier for each side to rise and fall if
children of equal weight sit on either end. If a heavy adult is on one end, and
a small child on the other, additional force is needed to raise the adult. In an
elevator, one end of the see-saw is the car with people inside, and the other
end is the counterweight. When both are nearly the same mass, then the
elevation of one (leading to an increase in its potential energy) is exactly
balanced by the descent of the other (with an equal decrease in potential
energy). If there is no net change in potential energy for the
car/counterweight system, then the work done by the motor turning the pulley
is reduced. If the car is completely empty, or at its total capacity, then there
will be a net change in the potential energy of the car/counterweight system,
and this change in energy must come from additional work done by the
motor.
   The length of the cable connecting the elevator car and the counterweight
has to be just a bit over the height of the building. When the elevator is in the
lobby, the counterweight is at the top of the building; conversely, the
counterweight is at ground level when the elevator is at the highest ﬂoor.
   But the cable does not just hang over the pulley. There must be suﬃcient
“grab” so that when the motor turns the drum, the cable moves along with it,
causing the car to rise or descend. The pulley is essentially a long cylinder,
and the cable holds on to it through simple friction. The more contact surface
area, the more rubbing, and the greater the frictional force. This is why the
cable is wound several times around the cylinder, instead of being draped just
once. Grooves cut into the cylinder in which the cable lies (a pulley with
grooves is technically called a “sheave”) also increase the friction. The center
of the cylinder is connected to the shaft of an electric motor, which can rotate
either clockwise or counterclockwise and at variable speeds. In this way, the
cable connected to the elevator car can be pulled up or let out.
   So that’s the basic physics behind how an elevator works—but what do you
have to do to get it to go fast safely? Speed is mostly dependent on the motor
that turns the top pulley. In a motor, a changing current in a coil generates a
magnetic ﬁeld that is alternately repelled from and attracted to the magnetic
ﬁeld of a permanent magnet or an electromagnet. The stronger this magnet,
the greater the torque—the twisting force that the motor can produce—and
the quicker it can spin the sheave up to a high rotation speed, which translates
to a faster rise or fall of the elevator car.
   The safe part takes a little more work. The main rule for elevator safety is
to employ a redundant system of redundancy.*1 One thick steel cable is
strong enough to hold up a full elevator car—most elevators actually use four
to eight cables. If one or even two were to snap, the car wouldn’t drop to the
bottom of the shaft.
   Even if all eight cables were to snap simultaneously, you still wouldn’t fall.
The elevator car is surrounded on two sides by vertical rails that run the
height of the shaft. Rollers from the car grip these rails, keeping the car
perfectly vertical (even if all of the passengers stood on one side of the car,
the elevator wouldn’t tip). These rollers have accelerometers that detect if the
car is shaking or wobbling, and apply compensating forces to counteract the
vibrations (not unlike anti-lock brakes that can pump much faster and more
sensitively than a driver can, following input from the vehicle’s
accelerometers). There are additional elevator brakes gliding along the rails
that will grab those rails if an excessive acceleration is detected. These brakes
use electromagnets that force the clamps open—when power is lost, the
clamps automatically close onto the rails, acting as a sort of dead-man’s grip.
These rail brakes have been around for years, but high-speed elevators would
generate such frictional heating when they tried to arrest the motion of a fast-
moving car that the metal in the brakes would melt. Today, brake clamps are
coated with an extremely hard ceramic material that can withstand much
higher temperatures than metals. (These ceramics are also employed in brake
pads on certain high-performance sports cars for the same reason.) There is
also a “governor” in the rotating pulley, with hooks that will engage stationary
ratchets, bringing the cylinder to a stop if it were to rotate at too high a speed.
This safety feature is very clever, capitalizing on the fact that at higher
rotations, the hooks will ﬂy away from the center of the spinning pulley, until
they grab the ratchet, stopping it.
   An elevator car moving at over 40 miles per hour inside an elevator shaft
needs to expend considerable energy pushing the air out of its way. Specially
designed, curved light-metal covers at the top and bottom of the car improve
its aerodynamics, reducing the energy needed to move through the air. Air
pressure is a concern inside the car as well, as a trip from the top of a tall
skyscraper to the lobby leads to the same unpleasant pressure on your
eardrums as experienced in airplane landings. Small fans inside the elevator
car adjust the air pressure as it begins its descent, so that when you arrive at
the ground ﬂoor, the pressure is already equilibrated.
   Another physical phenomenon associated with airplane rides is also
experienced in these high-speed elevators. In order to reduce travel time, the
motors attached to the sheave must start spinning the drum very quickly. That
is, the rotational acceleration is high, translating to a large linear acceleration
of the car. The feeling of heaviness or lightness you experience during these
accelerations is a perfect illustration of the “equivalence principle” of the
general theory of relativity: in a closed room, such as an elevator car, it is
impossible to distinguish between the eﬀects of acceleration and gravity.
When the car begins its ascent, there is a large acceleration upward, and the
elevator ﬂoor exerts an additional upward force (in addition to the force
balancing your normal weight), so you feel as if your weight had increased.
During most of the nonstop ride to the top, the car travels at a uniform speed,
so you feel your normal weight. But near the top, the car needs to decelerate
and the elevator ﬂoor exerts a large downward force, so that your apparent
weight is reduced. This is a mini-version of when certain airplanes perform a
controlled parabolic arc, at the height of which the passengers experience a
brief period of feeling weightless.


You arrive at the doctor’s oﬃce, check in, and are handed a clipboard
with a series of forms, asking for information that you have provided
every time you have visited. Despite the fact that there has been no
change in your medical insurance, the receptionist asks for your
insurance card, makes a photocopy of both sides, and asks you to be
seated. You sit down in the waiting area, turn on your smart tablet,
and enter your passcode. The screen opens to the home page,
displaying the time, temperature, and a series of app icons. You ask
the receptionist if wi-fi is available in the waiting room. She provides
the network password, and your tablet soon shows the concentric arcs
indicating that you are connected to the oﬃce’s system. You ﬁnger-
swipe to another page full of app icons and select one for your airline.
You checked in online last night, but now you want to make sure your
ﬂight is on time. The screen ﬁlls with the airline’s website. You tap
FLIGHT STATUS, and the site requests the ﬂight number or the origin
and destination. You can recall your ﬂight number without looking it
up, as it is the same as the year you were born. You enter this
information, there is a slight pause, and then the screen informs you
that your ﬂight is ON TIME, as well as providing your gate information.
You’re quite familiar with this airport, and recognize that your gate is a
fair distance from the TSA station. You are hopeful that you won’t have
to run to your plane (not on this ankle!). Just as you are about to ask
about the wait, the nurse appears and calls your name.
                                       —
   The simple act of visiting the airline’s website by tapping the appropriate
icon involves a wide variety of physical phenomena. First, whenever your
tablet accesses a website, it is in essence making a phone call. Instead of
hearing a dial tone that indicates the phone line is active, you look on a tablet
(or smartphone or laptop computer) for a series of concentric arcs that
conﬁrm the device has detected the particular radio-frequency signal of the
nearest wireless router. (The physics is the same when using your data plan,
so we’ll stick with wi-ﬁ.) The website address you type into the Internet
browser is actually a nickname for a numerical address that is roughly the
equivalent of a phone number. For a telephone call, an exchange determines
the best way to route the signal from your phone to the one you are calling.
For websites, there are certain designated servers that have the location of the
host computer sponsoring the requested site. The host computer stores all the
information (formatting and content) that is available to you when you visit
the site.
   Your smart tablet communicates via radio waves (wi-ﬁ)*2 with a computer
that sends the requested sequence of voltage pulses containing the
information for the website you wish to access. The transmission of
information in a landline phone call used to be done in an analog format.
Now most phones, as well as your smart tablet, handle vast streams of digital
information, that is, a sequence of ones and zeros. Which is fortunate
because, while the semiconductor processors in a tablet or smartphone are
very fast, they themselves are not very smart.
   The diﬀerence between analog and digital is the diﬀerence between
something that can change continuously and something that can be altered
only in discrete steps. For example, the sound waves generated by external
speakers are analog waves, as there is a continuous variation in their
amplitude and frequency. The voltage that told the speaker membrane how to
vibrate used to be analog but is often now a digital voltage created by adding
many tiny voltages together. The smaller the voltage steps used in a digital
voltage, the more closely the digital signal will represent the true, smoothly
varying signal when conveted to an analog voltage that should be sent to the
speakers.
   Even though digital signals are an approximation of the true voltage in an
analog signal, they have clear advantages in devices like smart tablets. In the
days before digital phones, long-distance communication was diﬃcult and the
reception was often poor. This is because the analog voltage sent along the
metallic telephone wire was susceptible to noise in the wire (arising, for
example, from the random motion of electrons in the wire, which in turn
induced voltage ﬂuctuations that competed with the signal you wished to
send). A more reliable way to transmit information is to use a digital code,
such as the dots and dashes representing numbers and letters in a Morse-code
telegraph system. This way, if certain digital bits are lost, the message’s
content often will still be understood by the receiver. Plus, if you don’t want
anyone to intercept and read your transmitted message, it is easier to encode a
sequence of ones and zeros than a full analog signal, which is great for online
commerce.
   Your screen is made up of a sequence of closely spaced dots called
“pixels,” and the digital code received by the tablet tells each pixel whether to
be bright or dark, and which color ﬁlters to activate. Each pixel is roughly ten
times bigger than a single cell in your body, so we do not see the image’s
intrinsic graininess. The net result of all of these bright and dark dots is a
high-resolution image. Most tablets have approximately 1,500 pixels along
one length of the screen, and 800 to 1,000 pixels down the other side. All
these dots add up to over 1 million pixels, or a “Megapixel.”
   Your tablet also monitors the status of each of these million pixels. By
touching the screen in a speciﬁc spot, such as a box labeled FLIGHT STATUS,
you send a signal to the processor in the tablet. You are initiating a
conversation with the computer that is sending the website’s digital data
stream to your tablet. The computer hosting the website responds by sending
a new set of instructions, and the display on your tablet changes, asking for
your ﬂight number. When you enter this information, the host computer sends
another data stream, and the display changes once again, telling you that your
ﬂight is scheduled to depart on time.


The nurse takes you back into a suite of rooms, weighing you and
measuring your height in the hallway before taking you to an
examination room. You sit in a chair as he goes through a standard
checklist of questions about your medical history, entering your
responses on a small laptop he brought with him. He then takes your
blood pressure, using a device that hasn’t really changed in decades.
Instead of monitoring your pulse with a stethoscope, he places a
plastic clip, like a small clothespin, on one of your ﬁngers. Having
recorded your blood pressure and pulse, the nurse next takes your
temperature, using an electronic thermometer. Rather than keeping
a thin tube of glass propped awkwardly under your tongue for several
minutes, you hold the electronic thermometer in your mouth for only a
few moments before it indicates that your body temperature is normal.
The nurse notes this on your electronic chart and, as he leaves,
informs you that a technician will be by in a minute to take you for an
x-ray.
                                     —
   The old-school glass thermometers consisted of a small hollow cylinder,
sealed at both ends and partially ﬁlled with a ﬂuid (either mercury or red-
dyed alcohol). One end of the thermometer was brought into contact with an
object (such as your body, at a point underneath your tongue), and if its
temperature was greater than room temperature, the liquid would expand,
rising in the cylinder.
   How do we know that the height of the liquid in the glass cylinder
corresponds to a particular temperature? If you put the end of the
thermometer in an ice bath (0°C, or 32°F) and note the height of the liquid,
then put it in a pot of boiling water (100°C, or 212°F ), you’ll notice the
liquid has risen—and should do so smoothly and uniformly as the
temperature increases. Mercury was best suited for this, as it stays a liquid
down to –38°F and doesn’t boil until 674°F. Red-dyed alcohol boils at 173°F
—good enough when monitoring a person’s temperature.
   But why does the height of the liquid, whether it is mercury or alcohol,
change with temperature? Even if objects expand when heated, won’t the
glass cylinder expand as well, so that there should be no net change in the
height of the liquid? Temperature represents the average energy-per-atom in
an object, whether solid, liquid, or gas. For most materials there is a small
extra component to the force between atoms (called an “anharmonic term”)
that provides a bit more pull in one direction over the other. This leads to a
small but real net relative displacement of the atom with rising temperature.
The amount that a material’s volume increases when warmed depends on the
detailed arrangement of the atoms and the precise nature of the forces
between them that hold the material together. Glass has a much smaller
anharmonic term than either mercury or alcohol, so as you warm up the
liquid in a thermometer, that liquid expands faster than its glass container.*3
The conduction of heat through glass is poor (which is why it makes a decent
thermal insulator), so a thermometer consisting of a ﬂuid-ﬁlled glass tube has
to be left in thermal contact under the tongue for some time to make sure the
mercury or alcohol has reached the same temperature as the patient.
   Any system can be used as a thermometer as long as it has an easily
measured physical property that changes uniformly with temperature. This
includes not just the structural properties of solids, but their electronic
properties as well. Metals are not very good electrical conductors at higher
temperatures, when their atomic vibrations increase. The shaking atoms can
scatter the electrical current, just as imperfections increased the resistance of
the toaster wire. Alternatively, semiconductors are not very good conductors,
as all of their electrons are locked into chemical bonds between the atoms.
Raising the temperature allows some of the electrons to momentarily leave
their chemical bond conﬁnement, dramatically lowering the electrical
resistance. By calibrating how their electrical conduction varies with
temperature, one can use measurements of a metal’s or semiconductor’s
resistance as a thermal sensor.
   Another common technique to measure temperature electrically involves a
device called a “thermocouple.” When two dissimilar metals are fused at a
single point, a voltage can develop across the connection that is sensitive to
temperature. Diﬀerent metals will have diﬀerent numbers of free electrons
per volume, so one metal can have more mobile electrons than the other.
When the metals are connected, some electrons from one metal will move
over to the other, just as gas atoms will expand from a high-pressure region
into a lower-pressure volume. Before they were connected, each metal had
the same number of negative electrons and positively charged ions, but after
they are fused there is a net electric-charge diﬀerence across the junction. A
small but measurable voltage thus forms between the two metals. As the
temperature of the metallic junction is changed, some electrons will move
from one side to the other, so this voltage will vary as the temperature
changes. Metals are also very good thermal conductors, so this electronic
thermocouple-based thermometer provides an accurate temperature reading
very quickly. The voltage generated by the thermocouple junction, or from
the temperature-dependent variation in the resistance of a metal or
semiconductor, is detected by a sensor chip in the electronic thermometer,
which instructs a liquid crystal display (LCD) to show the measured
temperature.


The technician takes you to another room, with a slightly wider
examination table, the standard sheet of white paper spread across it.
She asks you to take oﬀ the shoe and sock of the foot that has been
bothering you. The technician slides a black rectangular platter onto
the table and asks you to place your ankle on top of it. You have to
spread out at a funny angle to orient your ankle in the proper position.
The source of the x-rays is lowered from the ceiling of the room. The
technician makes sure your foot is pointing the right way, then places
a lead-lined apron over your torso and midsection. She brieﬂy steps
behind a protective wall and turns on the x-ray machine. There is a
slight buzz, and the x-ray scan is completed. The technician can tell
right away that your foot moved while the scan was being taken, so
she comes back in to readjust your leg. You make an eﬀort to remain
completely still, and this time the scan is successful. You ask how
long it will take to get the image developed, and the technician shows
you on a computer screen the high-resolution x-ray of your ankle. She
informs you that the image has already been sent electronically to
your doctor, and after you put your sock and shoe back on, she leads
you to your examination room. She tells you that the doctor will be in
to see you shortly.
                                      —
   X-rays are electromagnetic radiation, just like radio waves, microwaves,
visible light, and ultraviolet light. The most common method of generating
them employs the physics principle that we’ve invoked several times before—
changing electric currents create changing magnetic ﬁelds. In an x-ray tube, a
wire ejects electrons at one end of the tube, and a positive voltage on a screen
mesh at the other end attracts these electrons and accelerates them up to a
very high kinetic energy. The whole apparatus is enclosed in a glass jar from
which the air has been removed (this minimizes scattering of the electrons by
the air molecules), a forerunner of the vacuum tube. Most of the electrons do
not strike the wires in the positively charged mesh, but instead barrel through
the screen’s openings and then reach another plate, with a negative voltage,
that deliberately and rapidly slows them down. Any change in the electrons’
motion results in the emission of electromagnetic waves (think of the red
glow coming from the toaster wire). Under the right circumstances, the rapid
deceleration of the speeding electrons yields light with a very short
wavelength of about the size of a single atom, termed x-rays.*4
   As x-rays move into a solid like your ankle, they interact with the electrons
in the atoms in the material. These electrons scatter the x-rays like randomly
oriented mirrors, so while some of the x-rays continue on in a straight line to
the detector plate, most are reﬂected in other directions. The more electrons
in an atom, the more eﬀective it is at scattering the x-rays. Carbon has only
six electrons, so it allows a lot of the x-rays to pass through it. Lead has
eighty-two electrons, and is more eﬀective at scattering x-rays. This is why x-
rays do not penetrate lead. Gold has seventy-nine electrons, and is just as
opaque to x-rays as lead. (For obvious reasons,*5 the protective aprons used in
a doctor’s oﬃce to block unwanted x-ray exposure are not made of gold.)
   A water molecule has only ten electrons (eight from the oxygen atom, and
one each from the two hydrogen atoms) and therefore does not signiﬁcantly
scatter x-rays. Since we are mostly water, neither do we—and x-rays easily
pass through our bodies. A calcium atom has twenty electrons and is much
more eﬀective at scattering x-rays as water molecules. Our skeletons show up
bright on x-ray images, as the atoms in our bones reﬂect the x-rays away from
the detector plate. Any region that is missing atoms, such as a cavity in your
tooth or a fracture in a bone, will not scatter the x-rays, and the resulting
higher x-ray ﬂux will show up as a darker region on the detector plate. Even
in soft tissue, a section with a higher density of atoms will have more
reﬂectors than the surrounding material, and this mass can be detected in the
x-ray scan. In order to improve contrast, some x-ray scans require the
ingestion of a ﬂuid containing compounds of iodine (which has 53 electrons)
or barium (barium alone has 56 electrons, and barium sulfate, used in scans
of the digestive system, has 104 electrons). The incorporation of these
molecules improves their ability to scatter x-rays and enables the doctor to
obtain an accurate image without having to increase the x-ray beam intensity
to dangerous levels.
                                   FIGURE 3


   While being able to view structures beneath the surface is a great boon to
doctors and diagnosticians, there is a limit to the amount of information that
can be gleaned from a single two-dimensional snapshot. A full, three-
dimensional image is ideal. A given mass inside your body that is scattering
x-rays may be large in two dimensions but skinny in the third, like a pancake.
If this “pancake” were oriented so that the x-ray image showed it edge-on, it
would appear to be a long but narrow wedge and might not seem a cause for
concern. A full 3D image would give an accurate representation of the
scattering structure’s true size and extent. Of course, one cannot just rely on
two orientations at right angles to each other (like a mug shot), as the mass
may not cooperate by lying exclusively in one plane or the other. To construct
a full three-dimensional image using x-rays, we need to take multiple images,
with each scan acquired at a slightly diﬀerent position. The process of
combining a series of x-ray images in slices to create a three-dimensional
image is known as “tomography.” When it’s performed with a computer to
resolve the shadows and extract a complete three-dimensional image, this
type of x-ray imaging is called a CAT scan (for “computer-aided
tomography”) or a CT scan.
   “Tomography” (from the Greek for to write by sections) is the process
whereby one takes successive images using a probe that can penetrate beneath
the surface (such as x-rays or sound waves). As the slices systematically move
through the object, a full three-dimensional image can be reconstructed.
Think about imaging an orange that sits on a tabletop, using slices that are
parallel to the table surface. The ﬁrst slice at the top would yield a small dot.
As the slicing plane moves down toward the table’s surface, the images would
be of circles that grow in size. Once past the midpoint of the orange, these
circles would become smaller, and at the bottom of the orange we would
again have a ﬁnal slice with a small dot. Comparing and combining these
individual slices, each one of a circle with varying diameter, you would
conclude that the orange is shaped like a sphere. Alternatively, the same
process performed on a can of soup would yield a continuous series of
imaged circles of constant size, indicating that the soup is stored in a cylinder.
These simple cases can be analyzed by hand—similar procedures on a person
require a computer to reconstruct the image slices. The greater the number of
separate slices, the more accurate the resulting image will be, but this also
involves longer exposures to x-rays than in a single, two-dimensional scan.


The doctor arrives a minute later. She greets you and asks how you
are doing. Fine, you reply, except of course for the ache in your left
ankle, the reason for this morning’s visit. Pulling up an image from
your ﬁle on her laptop, she shows you the x-ray of your ankle, pointing
out the small amount of arthritis you have. When you protest that you
are too young for arthritis, she postulates that this is the result of an
old athletic injury. Perhaps you suﬀered a hairline fracture years ago in
school and thought it was only a swollen ankle. She is optimistic that
an injection of cortisone will reduce the pain. The shot will be
administered at the precise location of the current inﬂammation, using
ultrasound imaging to guide the needle. The procedure takes about
an hour, and the ultrasound machine is fully booked for the day. You’ll
just have to carry on as you have been, for the remainder of your day.
The doctor tells you that you can make an appointment for the
cortisone shot with the receptionist, and she gives you some extra-
strength analgesics to take in the meantime.
                                       —
    Sound is a wave phenomenon, and, perhaps surprisingly, it can also be used
as a visual tool. In medicine, sound waves can be used to provide visual
information about a patient’s interior. While electromagnetic waves can
propagate through the vacuum of empty space, sound waves cannot exist
unsupported by a medium—either a gas, a liquid, or a solid. In ultrasound
imaging, also known as “sonography,” that medium is your body. The fact
that the speed of sound varies with the density of the medium is the basis of
ultrasound imaging.
    Sound waves are periodic variations in the density of a medium. When you
strum a guitar string, you cause it to vibrate at a given frequency that is
determined by the string’s properties—tension, mass, and length. Think of
the string vibrating, with the center of the string moving up and down at one
particular frequency. As the string moves up, it collides with air molecules
and pushes them in the direction the string is moving. The air molecules
pushed by the string pile up, leaving a region that is relatively depleted of air
molecules behind it. When the string swings downward, it disturbs the air in
the direction of its motion. On the next upward swing, the string again causes
the air molecules to pile up into a higher-density region. The vibrating string
thus induces a periodic modulation in the density of the air above and below
it that propagates outward from the string.
   Sound also travels through liquids, such as water, via the same physical
process, and thus sound waves can propagate through us. The speed of the
waves depends on the properties of the ﬂuid and, all other factors being equal,
the denser the medium (that is, the closer together the atoms are jammed
next to each other) and the weaker the connections between the medium’s
atoms, the slower the sound waves will travel through it. When sound waves
strike the interface between two media in which the speed of sound changes,
some of the waves will be reﬂected at this boundary. By measuring the
changes in reﬂection as the position of the source of the sound waves is
varied, the ultrasound device can map out the density variations inside a
person.
   Typical ultrasound generators used in medical imaging applications have a
frequency of roughly two to three million cycles per second, well above the
detection range of even a person (or dog) with excellent hearing. Sound waves
with this high a frequency have a correspondingly short wavelength, which is
desirable for imaging. The shorter the wavelength, the smaller the features
that can scatter the waves (just as in the case of lidar used by the self-parking
car). If the separation between adjacent peaks in the wave is three feet, then
one will not detect signiﬁcant changes in the wave if it strikes an object that
has a length of an eighth of an inch.*6 To detect small-scale structures in the
body, ultrasonic imaging devices use sound waves with a wavelength close to
that of visible light. But unlike visible light, these sound waves can pass
through the surface of a person, to be reﬂected from the internal organs.
   In an ultrasound imaging system a piezoelectric material generates the
sound waves. By using an alternating voltage that smoothly oscillates between
a positive and a negative polarity, we can cause a piezoelectric material to
alternate between compressed and expanded volumes, generating sound
waves in the same manner as does a vibrating guitar string. The piezoelectric
material, vibrating at very high frequencies, generates pressure waves in any
medium in contact with the crystal—such as the ﬂuid in your body. The jelly
placed on your skin in preparation for an ultrasound scan is there to improve
the transfer of sound waves from the piezoelectric transducer to your body
(called “impedance matching”). The waves move into your interior, being
reﬂected at any interface where there is a change in density that results in
sound-wave speed variations. The reﬂected waves are then detected by a
piezoelectric material, which is subject to the oscillating pressure waves
compressing and expanding the solid, in turn generating a voltage that is
processed and transformed into an image. These interfaces are somewhat
subtle, which reduces the contrast in the resulting ultrasound image. Varying
the position of the source of the ultrasound waves yields reﬂections from a
variety of angles, performing a simple tomographic imaging procedure. The
engineering and data processing that go into obtaining an image are very
complex, but at its heart the physics of these devices is essentially the same as
what’s at work when, looking out into the night through a window, you see
your reﬂection in the glass.


You stop by the receptionist’s desk to make an appointment for the
ultrasound and the cortisone injection. However, when the receptionist
checks the doctor’s orders on her computer screen, she misreads the
notation and thinks that you need to schedule a magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) scan. You realize that there has been some
miscommunication when she asks you at which hospital you would
like to schedule the procedure, and if you have any tattoos. After a
minute or so, it’s sorted out that you do not need an MRI. Checking
your calendar on your smartphone, you agree to next Monday for your
cortisone injection.
                                       —
   Magnetic resonance imaging uses the fact that the building blocks of atoms
—the electrons, protons, and neutrons—each have a small, built-in magnetic
ﬁeld, like a little bar magnet with a north pole and a south pole.*7 Diﬀerent
elements have diﬀerent numbers of protons and neutrons in their nucleus, and
thus have diﬀerent nuclear magnetic ﬁelds. How can you measure the strength
of the magnetic ﬁeld of each magnetically active atom in your body? By
getting all of the nuclear magnets to point in one direction and seeing how
much energy it takes to ﬂip them 180 degrees. When you lie down inside a
very large electromagnet, with a big magnetic ﬁeld whose north pole is
pointing toward the ceiling (for the sake of argument), then the nuclear
magnets in your body will want to align with this external ﬁeld, just as a
compass needle will be drawn toward a magnet brought near it.*8
   To be precise, the nuclear magnetic ﬁelds have their lowest energy if they
point in the same direction as the outside magnet, and they’ll have their
highest energy if they are aligned in the exact opposite of the magnet’s
direction. This is the reason you can’t take any metal or credit cards into the
room where an MRI is active, for the massive electromagnet of the MRI
device can exert a large force on these objects. Similarly, the changing
magnetic ﬁeld of the MRI can cause heating in any metal inside your body, or
even on your skin if there are metallic inks used in your tattoo.
   Now, the magnetic ﬁeld of the nuclei in your atoms is extremely weak;
even when you place them in a very strong external ﬁeld, it doesn’t take much
energy to rotate them so that they are pointing away from that ﬁeld. This is
great news, as the light needed to ﬂip the nuclear magnets is at the low end of
the electromagnetic spectrum—radio waves that easily pass through your skin
and inside your body.
   When treated quantum mechanically, light consists of discrete packets of
energy termed “photons.” The energy of any form of light is determined by
its frequency. (This was ﬁrst recognized by Albert Einstein back in 1905, the
same year he developed the special theory of relativity.) A feature of
quantum mechanics is that nuclei and atoms can absorb a photon only if it
exactly corresponds to the separation of their energy levels. If the photon has
too little or too much energy, absorption can’t happen. The nuclei of diﬀerent
elements will have diﬀerent magnetic-ﬁeld strengths. The radio wave photon
energy needed to ﬂip a nuclear magnet in an external magnetic ﬁeld will
therefore diﬀer for each element, and the frequency (and hence energy) of the
absorbed radio waves indicates which atoms are present.
   Radio wave frequencies can be tuned very precisely, as anyone knows who
has tried to listen to a radio station broadcasting at 100.0 MegaHertz when
the radio dial is set to 100.3 MegaHertz. The dominant MRI signal comes
from water molecules that ﬁll every cell in your body. Pairs of protons (or
neutrons) join together, with the north pole of one facing the south pole of
the other, so that for each pair there is no net magnetic ﬁeld. The oxygen
atom in water has an even number of protons and neutrons, and consequently
its nucleus is not magnetic. The hydrogen atoms in H2O are essentially
isolated protons, and their internal nuclear magnetic ﬁeld will interact with
the MRI device’s magnetic ﬁeld. These hydrogen atoms are the main source
of the detected signal.*9
   In order to obtain contrast in an MRI scan, the magnetic ﬁeld is
deliberately made to be very weak on one side of your body (say, the left
side), increasing uniformly in strength across your torso, and strongest (in this
example) on the right side. So the nuclear magnets require very little energy
to ﬂip their orientation on the left side of your body and more energy to ﬂip
on the right. By noticing how many of the incoming radio waves are absorbed
as their frequency—and hence, their energy—is changed, you can ﬁgure out
the number and kinds of atoms that are present in the body. Pulling this
information together (with the aid of a lot of computing power) creates an
image of your interior.
   As mentioned, there is a very small diﬀerence in energy between when a
nuclear magnet is aligned with the magnetic ﬁeld or opposed to it. Rather
than ﬁght against this small signal, MRI devices harness it for image contrast.
The system is ﬁrst bombarded with a pulse of radio-energy photons, until the
numbers of nuclear magnets pointing along with the external ﬁeld and those
pointing opposed to it are the same. Now the radio-energy photon stream is
turned oﬀ, and the nuclear magnets opposed to the magnetic ﬁeld reorient
themselves to the lower energy state (aligned with the ﬁeld), emitting a radio
wave photon.
   The time it takes for the nuclear magnet to relax to its original
conﬁguration, with slightly more magnets aligned with the external ﬁeld than
opposed to it, is very sensitive to the other atoms near the nuclear magnet. By
measuring the time it takes for the nuclear magnets to return to their original
state, we can get information about what other kinds of atoms are nearby, and
from this we can construct a high-contrast image of organic matter within the
person.
   Very speciﬁc details of the biological state of the tissue, such as whether a
tissue mass is benign or cancerous, can be determined by MRI. One recent
study exploited the fact that cancerous tumors grow much faster than benign
masses, and thus will have a higher metabolism. After being injected with a
form of glucose that has an abundance of magnetically active nuclei, the
patients’ cancerous tumors take up this glucose faster than the surrounding
noncancerous matter, and thus on an MRI these malignant regions appear
brighter. Nuclear physics not only gives us an image of the body’s interior,
but also allows us to make crucial, life-saving diagnoses.


*1 That’s a joke, son!
*2 While it sounds similar to “hi-ﬁ,” which is shorthand for a high-ﬁdelity stereo system, the
 word “wi-ﬁ” is not a nickname or acronym for anything.
*3 Engineers must pay very careful attention to the thermal expansion of materials, so that
 components of a device such as interlocking gears do not change their separation with
 temperature. But thermal expansion can sometimes be used to advantage. For example,
 think of a long metallic strip, where one side is made of one metal and the other is
 composed of another metal. When turned into a coil, this bimetal strip—due to each metal
 having a diﬀerent rate of thermal expansion—will unwind or tighten itself as the
 temperature changes. Older models of thermostats used the winding and unwinding of such
 coils as a function of temperature to mechanically move a switch, increasing or decreasing
 the heat sent from the furnace, or to turn a toaster oﬀ when a preset temperature is
 reached.
*4 Physicists refer to this light as Bremsstrahlung, which is German for “braking radiation.”
*5 Gold shielding would be insanely expensive, and doctors using it would likely be
 continually robbed!
*6 This is why one cannot view individual atoms or smaller molecules using an optical
 microscope. The wavelength of visible light is roughly one thousand times larger than the
 diameter of an atom. In order to image individual atoms, one must employ quantum
 mechanical tricks, as in an electron microscope.
*7 In fact, originally MRI was called NMRI, for “nuclear magnetic resonance imaging,” but
 for marketing reasons the “N” was dropped from the name.
*8 Purists will note that, technically, the nuclear spins do not fully align with the external
 magnetic ﬁeld, but precess around it, like magnetic Gene Kellys in Singin’ in the Rain,
 spinning at an angle around the external magnetic lamppost. Purer purists will further note
 that, technically, this is a quantum mechanical process, and the sensitivity of the energy of
 a nuclear magnet to an external magnetic ﬁeld is known as the Zeeman eﬀect. But if you
 know all this—why are you reading this book?
*9 There are other atoms with net nuclear magnetic ﬁelds in the body, such as calcium,
 sodium, phosphorus, nitrogen, and isotopes of carbon and oxygen (which have more
 neutrons than protons—more on this later).
                            CHAPTER FOUR




                        You Go to the Airport



You make good time to the airport. You join the line of cars entering
the airport, slowing down from highway speed to a more sedate,
posted limit of 30 miles per hour. You move over to the lane to park in
the long-term general parking lot. You pull up to an e-ticket reader,
and an automated voice asks if you would like to save $2 per hour on
your parking. The message’s goal is to have you pay by credit card,
rather than requesting a paper ticket. When you leave the parking
ramp tomorrow, the exit booths will be fully automated, and you’ll
reinsert your credit card to pay for your overnight parking. You take out
the credit card you use most consistently for travel and push it into the
e-ticket reader. You pull the card out rapidly, and the wooden
barricade, painted with white and orange stripes, lifts up, granting you
access to the ramp.
                                     —
   Information about your charge account is stored on your credit card in
diﬀerent forms: the account number itself is printed on the front of the card;
there is a quarter-inch-wide magnetic stripe running along the length of the
card; and, in some versions, a memory chip is embedded within the card.
Each storage mechanism uses diﬀerent physical principles.
   Raised numbers on the front of the card are the simplest means of storing
information, perhaps deceptively simple. While no longer used on some
newer credit cards, originally these numerals were stamped into the back of
the card, so that the numbers were raised above the card’s surface on its front.
The utility of having an account number that protrudes from the surface is
evident when trying to provide permanent hard copies of a transaction for
both the seller and the buyer. In this case some sophisticated materials
science was utilized, based on the rather antique technology of carbon
paper.*1 Today, carbonless copies employ special paper containing tiny
hollow, spherical particles that are ﬁlled with ink. The shell of these particles
is not very strong and can be easily broken when one presses ﬁrmly on the
paper. In the case of the credit card imprinter, the paper is placed atop the
embossed account numbers on the card, and then a cylinder is rolled over the
paper and card. The height of the roller is set so that it will press on the paper
only when it passes over the protruding account number, breaking open the
ink-ﬁlled particles and permanently recording that your particular credit card
was used at a given store.
   Your account number, along with additional information, is also stored in
the magnetic stripe on your credit card. The stripe contains a series of
magnetic regions, whose north poles point in either one direction or the
opposite. Magnets are ideal for recording information, as long as one needs to
keep track of only two numbers. The way to represent any number using only
two inputs (such as north pole or south pole up, or the current in a transistor
being high or low) involves “binary numbers.” Since binary information is the
foundation of all modern digital data manipulation, let’s take a moment to
explain how it works.
   Our counting system, based on the number 10, is reasonable and relatively
straightforward, but there are many other ways to represent numbers. If one
deals with electrical currents, as in a computer, then the simplest way to
manipulate the currents is through a switch, which can be either open (in
which case the circuit is broken) or closed (whereby the current can ﬂow).
Similarly, small clusters of magnetic atoms in a credit card stripe or a
magnetic hard disc can have two orientations, with the north pole facing in
one direction or the other. This can be readily mapped to a dot or dash, an
“oﬀ” or “on,” a 0 or 1. The two-digit scheme by which numbers are
represented, called “binary,” is central to the logic and workings of
computers.
   Think about making change when you have a limited number of currency
denominations. Imagine we have 1’s, 10’s, 100’s, 1,000’s, and so on, but no
other bills. That is, we start with $1, and each higher denomination is ten
times greater than the preceding value (this is called the “base-10 system”).
To generate $42, we need four 10’s and two 1’s. If, in another example, I had
two 100’s, zero 10’s, and four 1’s, then I’d have $204. We do this so often that
we don’t pause to think that we are using a base-10 counting system, and that
writing “204” is a way to represent the number of 100’s, the number of 10’s,
and the number of 1’s. The drawback to a base-10 system is that it does not
work if I have only one bill for each denomination. This is the situation when
using magnets that have only two orientations (north pole up or north pole
down) to represent numbers. If I were limited to only one single, one ten-
spot, and one hundred-dollar bill, then I could represent 101, but not 204 or
42.
   Now imagine a diﬀerent form of currency, where I have 1’s, 2’s, 4’s, 8’s,
16’s, and so on. Once again, we start with 1, but now each higher
denomination is generated by multiplying the preceding value by 2. This
system of counting is called “base-2,” or binary. I can still generate any dollar
amount I want—for example, 21 is 16 + 4 + 1. Just as in the base-10 system,
I start with the ones on the far right, and add denominations to the left. So I
would write “21” as 10101; that is, from right to left, one 1, zero 2’s, one 4,
zero 8’s, and one 16. While this is longer and more awkward than the base-10
system, it has one big advantage: even if I had only one bill for each
denomination, any number can be represented.*2 Similarly, a binary code can
be assigned for the letters of the alphabet, and other abstract symbols.
   For the magnetic stripe on your credit card, you can read this information
using Faraday’s law, which states that changing magnetic ﬁelds generate
electric currents. In most credit card readers, you mechanically pull or swipe
the card through the scanner, causing the magnetic regions to pass by a coil
(or some other magnetic sensor).*3 If the magnetic region has a north pole on
one side and a south pole on the other, then the induced current will ﬂow one
way and then reverse direction as the region passes the coil, and be read as a
“1.” It’s the changes in the magnetic ﬁeld threading the coil that induce a
current, and if the magnet has only a north pole or south pole facing the coil,
the current will circulate in just one direction and be read as “0.” While the
actual conﬁguration of the credit card reader is a bit more involved than a
simple coil, and the single black stripe on the card actually consists of three
distinct bands, each of which contains its own set of information, the
underlying physics is the same as described here.*4
   The third way the account information is incorporated into your credit card
is via a small chip that communicates by radio waves with a receiver in the
credit card reader. This chip, often termed an RFID, uses radio frequency
(RF) light to provide identiﬁcation (ID). The chip in your credit card
communicates with the card reader using the same physics as the E-ZPass
system, with more advanced security protocols than your garage door opener
or keyless remote entry system. Most of the chips in credit cards use a system
called “near ﬁeld communication,” in which the radio signal dies away at
distances of more than four inches from the card (making it diﬃcult for
anyone to eavesdrop on your credit card and steal its information), which is
why you must either insert your card into the reader or hold it very close to it.
Once the terminal at the parking lot entrance has read and interpreted the
information on your credit card, it stores this data (in case you try to avoid
paying your parking fee) and opens the gate.


After parking your car, you retrieve your luggage from the trunk and
head over to the main terminal. You realize to your chagrin that you
forgot to take any cash with you when you left this morning. You would
prefer to have some money with you, just in case an emergency
arises. You scan the terminal, and ﬁnd an ATM oﬀ to the side of a
newsstand. More good news—the ATM is operated by your bank, so
you will not be charged a fee for using it. You insert your debit card
(taking care that the magnetic stripe is facing in the proper direction),
and the screen transitions from giving you the standard welcome to
asking for your PIN. You enter the four-digit code. Even though it has
been a while since you used it, you correctly recall your PIN, and the
touch screen now changes again, presenting you with a series of
options. You tap the box labeled WITHDRAW MONEY FROM CHECKING,
and the screen changes to a series of boxes, listing options for the
total amount you wish to withdraw. You tap the box for $100, and the
ATM asks if you want a paper receipt or if it may e-mail one to you.
You select the e-mail option, and in a few moments your debit card
ejects from the machine, along with ﬁve crisp $20 bills. You pocket
the money and head over to TSA.
                                       —
   When you touch the screen at the ATM kiosk, your ﬁnger becomes part of
an electrical circuit. On some screens, the pressure of the touch alters current
ﬂow, while other screens sense your own electrical conductivity. The ﬁrst
kind of touch screen uses “resistive” sensing, as the screen actually resists the
force of your ﬁnger. The area of the touch screen is divided into an ordered
grid, like a checkerboard ﬁlled with many small squares. The front of the
screen that you touch is a transparent, electrically conducting plastic, which is
separated by a thin insulator from a type of glass that has been chemically
modiﬁed so that it is also a good conductor of electricity. When you press on
the screen you force the top conductor to come into contact with the bottom
conducting glass, closing a circuit and allowing current to ﬂow between the
top and bottom layers. An electronic semiconductor chip records the location
on the screen (that is, the location of the squares of the “checkerboard”) that
now carries a current, and processes this information. The beneﬁt of this
mechanism is that it works even if you are wearing gloves or using a stylus
pen—touch screens that ask for your signature to verify a credit card
purchase are typically “resistive.” The downside, as evidenced by the moronic
scrawl that your signature becomes on these screens, is that their resolution is
not very high. Moreover, as you are physically pressing down on the screen,
the touch sensors are susceptible to scratches and other types of damage.
   When a lighter touch is needed, another type of touch screen relies on your
ability to conduct electricity. Underneath your ﬁngertip in this second kind of
touch screen is a device called a “capacitor,” which is used to store electrical
charges. A capacitor typically consists of two metal plates stacked one atop
the other, like the slices of bread in a sandwich. Negatively charged electrons
are spread over one of the metal plates, and the other plate develops an equal
positive charge. The space between the plates is ﬁlled with an insulator (the
ﬁlling in this “sandwich”). This arrangement is similar to the two conducting
sheets separated by a thin insulator in the resistive touch screens—only here
we don’t have to physically smush the electronic sandwich to register where
you are touching the screen.
   As before, the touch screen is divided into squares. Each small square on
the screen is a capacitor, connected to other circuitry beneath it in the
device’s interior. When the charge stored on one of the plates in a square is
changed, its circuitry registers this modiﬁcation, and information is then sent
to the computer chip waiting for an input. Humans are actually pretty good
carriers of electrical charge; think of how you pick up excess charges rubbing
against a nonconducting surface such as a carpet. When you touch a particular
location, you add your personal capacitance to the circuit; this change in the
net capacitance is detected, and an appropriate signal is sent to the processor,
indicating which location was selected. In some versions of these touch
screens the top conductor is missing, and your ﬁngertip becomes the top plate
that completes the capacitor (and modiﬁes the circuit waiting to determine
which squares have been selected).*5 Water (including sweat)*6 is also
conductive, and if it lands on the capacitive touch screen on squares other
than the ones you intend to select, it can confuse the sensors.
   A basic capacitor consists of two metal plates, but if this were the kind
used in touch screens, then you would never be able to see where you should
touch. The image on the ATM’s screen is projected from a screen underneath
the top layer of capacitors that record the region where you touch the surface.
The capacitors that make up the touch screen circuit must therefore allow
light to pass through them. They employ a special alloy, indium tin oxide, that
is both a good conductor and nearly as transparent as window glass.
Conducting transparent materials, also used in resistive touch screens,
combine two contradictory features—a large density of electrical charges that
are free to move under an applied voltage (which makes them good
conductors), and a large separation between allowed energy levels (which
makes them transparent to visible light that has insuﬃcient energy to promote
a charge from lower energy states to the upper energy states).
                                   FIGURE 4


   Some touch screens use light to determine the region you touch or swipe.
When moving through something like water or glass, light travels slower than
it does in a vacuum or in air. In the denser media, the electric ﬁelds of the
oscillating electromagnetic waves interfere with the electric ﬁelds of the
atom’s electrons, and this interaction acts as a form of drag on the light. If
light moves faster in one medium than it does in another, what happens when
it crosses the boundary separating the two diﬀerent materials? Anyone who
has noticed that a straw in a glass of water appears to be broken at the
air/water interface has witnessed the consequence of this discontinuity in light
speed. The bending of the light beam’s path at the interface is a consequence
of the light taking the fastest path between two points, and is called
“refraction.” The property of a given material—whether gas, liquid, or solid
—that governs how fast light moves in it, and hence how sharp a bend it
makes at the interface between two substances, is called “the index of
refraction.”
   For light moving from a larger index of refraction (where its speed is
slower) to a medium with a lower value (where it moves faster), if the angle it
makes at the boundary is large enough, the light may bend so much that it
doesn’t escape the larger-index material. The value of this angle depends on
the diﬀerence in the indexes of refraction between the two media, and for any
larger angle the light will be reﬂected at the interface, as if it were bouncing
from a mirror. This phenomenon is called “total internal reﬂection,” and it is
the basis of ﬁber-optic cable; it’s also exploited in ultrasound imaging.
   The physical process of total internal reﬂection is employed in some newer
versions of touch screens. A series of diodes that emit light in the infrared
portion of the spectrum are embedded along the outer rim on two sides of the
plate. These infrared light beams experience total internal reﬂection from the
top surface plate, and are detected by light sensors that line the opposite two
sides of the plate. When one touches the top plate, the reﬂected light beam is
disturbed and the change in the light’s trajectory is noted by the sensors. With
appropriate software, the system can ascertain which location or locations
caused the alteration in the light’s motion. Unlike the distributed capacitor
system, this technique is sensitive to anything that would change the light’s
reﬂection, such as contact with a nonconducting gloved ﬁnger or a stylus pen.


Using your phone, you open your airline’s app and call up your
boarding pass, represented digitally with a quick-response (QR)
symbol. Luckily, you have been selected for TSA PreCheck. The laser
scanner at the TSA agent’s station reads the symbol on your phone
and beeps to let you through, after the agent has compared your
likeness on your driver’s license with the real article. You place your
luggage and briefcase on the conveyor belt that passes through the x-
ray machine. You then join the line to walk through the metal
detector.
                                      —
   If you want to make a metal detector, ﬁrst start with your electric
toothbrush and its recharger cup. In order to recharge the battery in your
electric toothbrush, you placed the handle into a plastic holder that was
connected to the electric outlet. In the holder was a coil that carried an
alternating current from the outlet that created a changing magnetic ﬁeld.
This changing magnetic ﬁeld penetrated the second coil in the toothbrush
handle, and the changing magnetic ﬂux through this coil induced a current.
The presence of any metal between the two coils will alter the amount of
magnetic ﬁeld passing through the second coil.
   The handheld metal detectors used by those seeking spare change or buried
treasure at the beach also use two coils to detect the presence of any metal.
These personal metal detectors have a large disc at the end of a stick, and to
search for metallic objects, you move the plate near the ground. The plate has
two concentric coils—an outer coil around the rim of the plate that, through
an alternating current, creates an alternating electromagnetic ﬁeld (equivalent
to very, very low-frequency radio waves); and an inner coil closer to the
plate’s center that detects any reﬂected waves. If the radio waves generated by
the outer coil impinge on a metallic object, this induces an alternating current
in the object that generates its own varying magnetic ﬁeld in the opposite
direction of the incident signal. The inner coil then detects this reﬂected wave
and sends an alarm (such as a ﬂashing light or beep) to indicate that the plate
has passed over a good conductor of electricity.
   The walk-through detectors at civic buildings and airports use a minor
variation on this process. They run a current through a coil in one side of the
arch and then abruptly turn the current oﬀ. The current in the coil creates a
magnetic ﬁeld, and when it suddenly stops, the ﬁeld passing through the coil
similarly disappears. But changing the magnetic ﬁeld passing through a coil
will create a current that brieﬂy tries to keep the magnetic ﬁeld unchanged.
That is, there is a current induced in the main coil, created when the magnetic
ﬁeld rapidly decreases. In old-style incandescent lightbulbs, you can see this
back-current when you switch oﬀ the light using a wall switch. Watch closely,
and you’ll see the light dim, very brieﬂy grow brighter, and then be
extinguished as the lightbulb turns oﬀ. The momentary relighting of the bulb
is the induced current, with the circuit trying to prevent the change in the
magnetic ﬁeld created when the power is turned oﬀ.
   The airport metal detector continually pulses a current through its coil in
the archway and monitors the magnitude of this induced current. A metallic
object that passes through the arch acts momentarily as an antenna, and when
the magnetic ﬁeld is turned oﬀ, the object also brieﬂy generates a current,
responding to the change in the magnetic ﬁeld. The induced current detected
in the coil in the arch increases slightly when the metal enters the detector
and then decreases as the metal leaves. The detector typically pulses the
current in its coil a hundred times a second and adds up all the induced
currents to identify the presence of metal.
   What if you forgot to remove a metallic object, and have to be checked
using a handheld-wand metal detector? This device operates in a manner
similar to the beachcombing metal detector: one coil generates a very low-
frequency and low-power radio wave, while another measures changes in this
signal due to any metal object.


The person ahead of you in line for the metal detector has really
thrown a wrench into the works. The TSA PreCheck detector should
not have been set oﬀ by his wristwatch. The detector’s sensitivity
levels need to be adjusted, in order to avoid additional false positives.
The TSA agent instructs you to use the adjacent full-body scanner.
Emptying your pockets of everything, including the paper money you
secured minutes ago from the ATM, you place it all in a small plastic
dish on the x-ray machine’s conveyor belt. You step into the scanner.
With your elbows bent, you raise your arms above your head and, in a
misplaced bit of vanity, suck in your belly. You stand still while the
scanner bar orbits about you. I surrender, you say to yourself. Just
please don’t let me miss my flight.
                                       —
   Most scanners at airports use “millimeter waves” to check for any
contraband underneath your clothing, using the principle of “backscattering.”
Instead of measuring the light that passes through an object, in what is called
transmission mode, backscattering monitors the light scattered at the interface
between changes in density. Your dentist uses the transmission method when
she takes an x-ray of your tooth. The detector photographic ﬁlm is placed
behind your tooth, and the x-ray source is located in front of the tooth. The
ﬁlm thus records any x-rays that are transmitted through the tooth, and any
change in density (such as a cavity or a ﬁlling) alters the amount of x-rays that
can make it to the detector, showing up as a change in recorded signal
intensity.
   Another way to create an image is to measure the reﬂected or scattered
waves whenever the medium that the waves encounter changes. Physicists
refer to these reﬂected waves as “backscattered waves,” and the scanners at
the airport have two vertical rods that contain both a source and a detector of
millimeter waves, one moving in front of your body and the other passing
behind you, forming a complete scan.
   A millimeter wave is an electromagnetic wave with a wavelength of
roughly 1 millimeter (about 0.04 inch, which is over ten times the diameter of
an average human hair). Another term for a millimeter wave is a
“microwave,”*7 the same range of the electromagnetic spectrum that your cell
phone uses for communication. Light with a wavelength of one meter (a little
over three feet) or longer is used for radio and television, while wavelengths
of one nanometer (one-billionth of a meter) are x-rays. Visible light has a
wavelength between 400 and 700 nanometers, depending on its color.
   The reason the full-body scanner uses microwaves with a wavelength of
one millimeter is that electromagnetic waves of this wavelength can pass
easily through your clothing but are reﬂected from your skin. The ﬁbers in
your clothing don’t perturb the millimeter waves, as they are small compared
to the wavelength of the microwaves, just as a large ocean wave is not
deﬂected when it passes by a buoy or a swimmer. Your skin, on the other
hand, provides a large barrier to the microwaves, which are scattered back
when they reach you. Any object secured under your clothing will reﬂect the
microwaves diﬀerently than your epidermis, and this diﬀerence in
backscattering is detected by the scanner. Just as you have to remove any
metal objects from your person when passing through a metal detector, you
have to empty your pockets and remove your belt when using the full-body
scanner, so as to not obscure the imaging under your clothes.
   No matter how long you stand in the scanner booth, however, you won’t be
cooked like a baked potato. The microwaves in the full-body scanner are
much weaker than those used in your microwave oven, or even those used
when sending a message to your cell phone.
   While the millimeter wave scanner indicates whether you have anything
hidden underneath your clothing, it provides a low-resolution image of any
contraband. Though much less common than the millimeter-wave-based
scanners, some airports have x-ray-based backscattering systems that provide
a more precise image of what a passenger could be smuggling.
   Speaking of x-rays, right now your carry-on bag is being examined using a
solid-state method for imaging that does away with photographic ﬁlm.


While you stand in the full-body scanner, your carry-on luggage, along
with the contents of your pockets, has passed on the conveyor belt
through the x-ray machine. From your vantage point in the glass booth
of the scanner, you can see the ﬂat-panel monitor of an x-ray
scanner at another security checkpoint. When a bag passes through
the scanner, you see an image showing the outline of the bag and the
silhouettes of various items inside it. You know that x-rays don’t show
colors the way we see them, yet the various items in the bag appear
to be of several diﬀerent colors. Despite the delay due to the metal
detector and full-body scanner, your bags have not reached the other
side of the security checkpoint yet. A TSA agent is having some
diﬃculty making out something in your bag, and he has stopped and
reversed the conveyor belt.
                                    —
   The x-ray imager used by the TSA operates in transmission mode,
exposing the top of your bag to x-rays and measuring what passes through.
Your luggage passes over a solid-state detector plate that is divided into a
large number of individual semiconductor pixels. We can think about
nonconductors such as insulators or semiconductors as an old-style movie
theater, in which all seats in the lower-energy orchestra are occupied by
electrons and all seats in the higher-energy balcony are empty.*8 Only
electrons excited up into the balcony, by either heat or light, will be able to
move from seat to seat, carrying an electrical current. (Electrons don’t like to
be in the same location as other electrons, so they can only move over to
another seat if it is empty.)*9
   The now-vacant seats in the orchestra (called “holes”) can also move in
response to an electric ﬁeld—as adjacent electrons slide over, the empty seat
acts like a positive charge moving through the solid. In an insulator the energy
separation between the top of the ﬁlled lower band and the bottom of the
empty upper band is in the ultraviolet part of the spectrum, which is why
many insulators, such as window glass, are transparent to visible light. In
glass, visible light does not have enough energy to bridge the orchestra and
the balcony; this light cannot be absorbed, and it passes right through the
material. Semiconductors, on the other hand, have an energy separation in the
infrared or visible part of the electromagnetic spectrum, and thus it is easier
to promote electrons into the higher-energy balcony states.
   In some detectors the x-rays are absorbed directly by the semiconductor,
while in other systems the x-rays ﬁrst strike a material called a “scintillator,”
which emits a ﬂash of visible light when exposed to high-energy radiation.
The absorption of either x-ray or visible-light photons generates mobile
electrons and an equal number of positively charged holes in the
semiconductor detector. A small built-in electric ﬁeld pulls the charges to the
top and bottom of the device, where they pile up. The more light that is
absorbed, the more charges that pile up, and measuring these charges
provides a record of the light striking that particular pixel.
   Before the x-rays reach the detector, they have to interact with the contents
of the bag in the scanner. When trying to image the contents of a piece of
luggage, contrast is king. For a given atom, the more electrons it has, the
greater the likelihood that it will scatter x-rays from their initial trajectory.
The baggage scanner uses x-rays with a range of energies (and hence
wavelengths) in order to enhance the scattering sensitivity. Explosive
materials tend to be composed of long-chain carbon molecules (remember
that each carbon atom has only six electrons), and their atoms interact better
with lower-energy x-rays. The steel in knives and handguns is mostly made of
iron, which is more eﬀective at scattering higher-energy x-rays. Your bag is
exposed to both high- and low-energy x-rays, and two detectors with a thin
layer of metal between them record what passes through—the top detector
gets the full signal and the second detector is underneath a metal plate that
ﬁlters out the low-energy x-rays. The intensity of the transmitted x-ray signal
is color coded, depending on the x-ray’s energy. By comparing the signal
between both the high- and low-energy x-rays from the top detector and then
looking at just the high-energy x-rays from the bottom detector, one can
extract how many low-energy x-rays were scattered, improving the imaging
of any organic material.
   Your laptop is scanned separately, but not necessarily because the metal in
the casing would shield any objects underneath the computer from the
probing x-rays. Most cases are composed of either plastic (an organic
material) or aluminum, which is one of the few metals with a low number of
electrons (thirteen) per atom. The separate scan is because the computer
interiors are dense and complex. There are so many small components within
a laptop or tablet that the device warrants its own careful examination to
make sure no contraband resides within.


Your luck seems to have run out. Your bag has caught the attention of
the TSA agent operating one of the x-ray scanners. As you return the
contents of your pockets back where they belong, you hear the four
words you never want to hear at an airport security checkpoint: “Is this
your bag?” You nod, and the agent tells you he wants to test it further.
He takes your bag to a stainless-steel table behind the checkpoint
and wipes the outside of the bag with a small white paper disc. He
places this disc into a large, box-shaped device that you note is
labeled an explosive-trace detector. Less than a minute later, the
device gives the all-clear, and the TSA agent thanks you for your
cooperation. You are ﬁnally free to go, and not a moment too soon.
You will have to hurry to get to your gate on time.
                                      —
   When a small paper disc is wiped over your luggage, any traces of the
chemicals that are employed in explosives are transferred to the disc. If you
had recently touched explosive powder, minute amounts would be embedded
in the grease of your ﬁngerprints. When you touched your bag, about a
milligram of material could have been transferred. The explosive-trace
detector is designed to “sniﬀ” for speciﬁc chemicals on the paper disc.
   We need some way to distinguish one type of molecule from another. A
molecule of trinitrotoluene (TNT) consists of seven carbon atoms, six oxygen
atoms, ﬁve hydrogen atoms, and three nitrogen atoms, all arranged in a very
particular conﬁguration. There are certainly larger molecules, but a molecule
of TNT is many times bigger than the oxygen and nitrogen molecules that
make up the atmosphere, and much more massive. Ideally we would like
some sort of test that is sensitive to both the shape and the mass of the
molecule so that it could pick out TNT from other organic molecules,
avoiding the problem of false positives. One such method used to select the
TNT molecules from the crowd is called “ion mobility spectroscopy,”*10 and
it involves having all the molecules coming oﬀ the white disc run an “auto
race.”
   Imagine that I install the same engine into two diﬀerent vehicles, such as a
large van and a small sports car, and I start them from the same point and
have them race in a straight line—which vehicle would win? Because they
have the same engine, the diﬀerence in travel time will depend (for the most
part) on the diﬀerence in weight and air drag. The heavier the vehicle, the
smaller the acceleration the engine can provide. Moreover, because the van
has a much larger surface area and front proﬁle, it will have greater air
resistance. Any energy from the engine that is required to push the air out of
the way as it travels down the racetrack is not available to increase the auto’s
speed. Therefore, I can distinguish between the van and the sports car by
seeing which one crosses the ﬁnish line ﬁrst, as long as they have the same
engine, since the travel time depends on their mass and air drag diﬀerences.
While we can tell these two vehicles apart by looking at them, the same
process works just as well when we can’t visually inspect the racers as when
we are dealing with molecules.
   The white disc that has been swiped over the luggage is placed at one end
of a cylinder (the starting line of the track) and is then heated, driving the
molecules into the vapor phase. We want to pull the molecules down to the
other end of the cylinder (the ﬁnish line of the track), and we want the pulling
force to be the same for all molecules, regardless of their chemical
composition. One way to accomplish this is to remove one electron from each
molecule, leaving them all with a net positive charge of +1. A negative
voltage is applied at the ﬁnish-line end of the cylinder, and this pulls all
molecules with the same force, as the only factor that governs how an object
responds to a voltage is its net electrical charge of +1.
   Having all the molecules have the same charge is equivalent to putting the
same engine in all the vehicles in this race. The cylinder is ﬁlled with a
particular pressure of air, to control the eﬀects of air drag as the molecules
move down the cylinder. Now, because they all experience the same pulling
force from the negative voltage at the end of the cylinder, we note the time
they need to reach the other end of the tube. The result is a spectrum of
molecules separated by mass and size, arising from the diﬀerent mobility of
the ions, and so the explosive-trace testing station is an “ion mobility
spectrometer.” From prior calibration experiments, we know how long a
molecule with the mass and structural conﬁguration of TNT will take to go
from one end to the other. If we record any molecules “crossing the ﬁnish
line” at that particular time, then we have good reason to suspect that the bag
in question was in contact with TNT at some point, warranting additional
scrutiny.


*1 Originally, carbon paper was a waxy sheet of paper embedded with carbon-black particles
 and sandwiched between two plain sheets of paper.
*2 If you understand that the number 2 is written in binary as “10,” with 0 in the ones
 column and 1 in the twos column, you will be able to appreciate the following “nerd
 humor”: There are 10 kinds of people in the world—those who understand binary and those
 who don’t.
*3 Many stripe readers detect the magnetic regions using a “read head,” similar to that used
 in your computer’s magnetic hard drive, where the current through the detector is sensitive
 to the nearby magnetic ﬁeld. I’ve used a coil here as a simpler example.
*4 This mechanism is the same as that by which information encoded on magnetic tape—
 such as in a music cassette or a reel-to-reel tape player—is converted to electrical voltages
 that, when ampliﬁed and processed, cause audio speakers to vibrate. A more sophisticated
 magnetic storage of information is employed in a videocassette recorder (VCR), but the
 physics is the same.
*5 One can use a stylus pen on a capacitive-coupled touch screen, but it must be a special
 pen that has its own capacitor in its tip.
*6 Pure, distilled water is actually a pretty good insulator. Ions in tap water, rainwater, and
 sweat can greatly increase its electrical conductivity.
*7 Technically a wavelength of one millimeter is between the microwave and infrared regions
 of the spectrum, but it’s closer to the microwave.
*8 This is one of my favorite analogies for the band structure of solids, and I’ve used it many
 times. Perhaps I’ve spent too much time at the movies, and not enough in the library.
*9 The formal name associated with this phenomenon is the “Pauli exclusion principle.”
*10 Technically the spectrometer is detecting special “tagging molecules” that by law must be
 added to all explosives, but for simplicity we’ll just refer to TNT.
                               CHAPTER FIVE




                            You Take a Flight



Somehow, you’ve made it to your gate just as the second-to-last
passenger is boarding. You call out to the boarding agent to hold the
door. You run up, out of breath, and see that they are waiting for you!
You apologize and quickly reload your boarding pass QR code onto
your smartphone. The laser scanner beeps, welcoming you to board.
However, at this stage all of the overhead storage space is completely
full. Your bag will have to be gate-checked. Not ideal, but much better
than missing the ﬂight. The gate agent asks if there are any
electronics or a lithium battery in your now no-longer-carry-on bag.
You inform her that there is not, and she attaches a red tag to your
bag and asks you to take it to the end of the Jetway, right by the
entrance to the aircraft. The ground crew, taking the last of the bags
for storage in the cargo hold, accepts yours from your grateful hands.
                                       —
   The ﬂight attendant asked if there are any lithium batteries in your checked
luggage for two reasons: (1) all batteries have the potential to release their
stored energy in an uncontrolled manner if damaged, and (2) the high-energy
density of lithium-ion batteries makes them particularly hazardous.
   Lithium, like its alkaline cousins sodium and potassium, is a very
chemically active metal, and in its pure, elemental state it reacts violently with
water. As conventional alkaline batteries age, hydrogen gas can build up in
the cell, exerting increasing pressure until the seal of the battery is breached.
The alkaline metal will then react with carbon dioxide in the air, forming a
furry coating over the electrodes of the metal terminal. As bad as this is for
conventional alkaline batteries, lithium-based batteries been known to have
more dramatic failures, resulting in ﬁres or explosions. Their greater energy
density means that much more energy is released if there is a short to the
terminal separator, compared to a conventional alkaline battery. This is why
one must take care when disposing of any battery, particularly a lithium-ion
battery. Any puncture or crushing of the battery container can result in a
dangerous short-circuit situation.
   Lithium-based batteries are found in many personal electronic devices, as
they have a better available-energy-per-pound compared to other batteries.
The stored electrical energy in the battery comes from the energy released by
the chemical reactions that pile up charged ions on the terminals. One way to
get more charges in the electrodes is to use ions with more than either one
extra or one missing electron. However, once one electron is removed from an
atom, making it an ion, the now unbalanced positive charge of the nucleus has
a stronger pull on the remaining electrons, and it becomes much harder to
extract additional electrons or to add electrons to negative ions. If one can’t
easily vary the charge of the ions, another way to increase the charge-stored-
per-pound of a battery is to use lighter ions, decreasing the weight of the
battery. The lightest atom that is not a gas at room temperature is lithium,
and lithium-ion batteries have played an important role in the development of
portable electronic devices.
   Years ago, batteries in automobiles consisted of lead-acid mixtures. Lead is
a big, heavy atom, weighing over two hundred times more than a hydrogen
atom. Hydrogen, the universe’s lightest element, consists of a single proton in
the nucleus orbited by one electron; lead has 82 protons and 125 neutrons in
its nucleus, surrounded by 82 electrons. Protons and neutrons are roughly
2,000 times more massive than electrons, so to reduce the weight of an atom,
consider elements with very light nuclei. Helium has only two protons and
two neutrons in its nucleus, and is the second-lightest element after hydrogen,
but it’s a gas at room temperature and pressure, as well as chemically inert,
and thus not suitable for electrical energy storage in a battery. The third-
lightest element, with only three protons and three neutrons in its nucleus, is
the alkaline metal lithium. This is the source of the big savings in weight of
lithium-ion batteries.
   Regardless of the type of conducting electrodes they employ, or the
speciﬁc composition of the ﬂuid in which they reside, batteries rely on a
chemical reaction to generate ions in order to provide a voltage. This reaction
expends energy, which forces the ions onto the terminals. In lithium batteries
the terminals are composed of layered materials such as graphite or cobalt
oxide that consists of stacks of atoms, like the levels in a parking garage. The
lithium ions thus reside inside these terminals, parked between the atomic
planes, enabling more ions to be stored. The maximum voltage that a battery
can hold is determined by how much energy is available from the chemical
reaction, as the more ions are added to a terminal, the harder it gets to force
an additional ion into place. The positive ions on one terminal are electrically
attracted to the negative charges on the other. All batteries must therefore
have a barrier of some sort to keep the charged terminals separate, preventing
the ions from recombining. This barrier must be porous, in order to allow the
chemical reactants to move to the respective terminals, but it can’t be such an
open border that the negative and positive charges can leave their electrodes
and recombine within the battery itself. If this barrier is breached, the battery
can short-circuit, and the energy expended to charge up the terminal is rapidly
recovered,*1 typically in the form of heat and gas due to the reversal of the
chemical reaction.


You board the aircraft and make your way down the aisle to your
assigned seat. It’s not hard to spot the only unoccupied one in the full
plane, way in the back, a window seat. You place your small bag
underneath the seat in front of you and fasten your seatbelt. The main
ﬂight attendant announces that the airplane door has been closed and
that all personal electronic devices should be turned oﬀ or switched to
airplane mode (you do the latter for your smartphone and check that
your tablet is oﬀ). After a few minutes the plane begins taxiing toward
the runway. The pilot comes on the public address system, welcomes
you onboard, and indicates that your ﬂight is number two for takeoﬀ.
The ﬂight attendant begins the well-practiced safety presentation, and
almost as soon as she says the last word, the pilot tells the crew to
prepare for takeoﬀ. The plane idles for a moment at the start of the
runway, and then the throttle is opened and the craft begins its
acceleration. Gaining speed, the airplane begins, gently at ﬁrst, to
angle up toward the sky. Soon you are airborne.
                                        —
   If you want to leave the surface of the Earth, whether in a hot air balloon
or a supersonic jet, you need more air molecules to strike the bottom of your
craft than the top, leading to a net unbalanced upward force, and if this force
is greater than your weight, it will lift you up, up, and away.
   Hot air balloons and blimps rise for the same reason ice cubes ﬂoat at the
top of your drink rather than sit on the bottom of the glass—a diﬀerence in
density leads to an upward force, called “buoyancy.” The magnitude of the
buoyant force depends on the size of the object, that is, how much of the ﬂuid
or air is displaced by the volume of the object. If the weight of the object is
greater than the weight of the medium it displaces, it will sink; if it is lighter,
it will ﬂoat.*2 To get a balloon to rise, one ﬁlls it with a gas (typically either
hot air or helium) that has less mass per volume (density) than the
surrounding atmosphere. For transportation in a device that has a density
greater than air, one has to work a little harder in order to arrange for the
atmosphere to provide a net upward force.
   An airplane’s wings are shaped and curved, with a larger proﬁle on top of
the wing, so that the air moving beneath the wing is deﬂected downward and
the air moving above the wing turns upward. The air beneath the wing is
jammed into a smaller volume, and when this happens the air pushes back on
the wing in the opposite direction. Here we make use of Newton’s third law
of motion: For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction—or, forces
come in pairs. You cannot push on something without that something pushing
back on you. This deﬂection of the moving air creates a larger pressure (force
per area) under the wing. Above the wing the air moves into a larger region,
which decreases the pressure. The faster the plane moves, the more air per
second is deﬂected, and the greater the pressure diﬀerence across the top and
bottom of the wing. This diﬀerence in pressure caused by the eﬀort of
deﬂecting the ﬂow of air leads to a net upward force. At a high enough speed,
this upward force can be greater than the weight of the plane.
   How does the plane move so fast that an upward lift is achieved? Once
again, the operating principle is Newton’s third law of actions and reactions.
In the early days of ﬂight (and still today, for smaller planes), the speed of the
plane resulted from forward thrust obtained from rotating propellers. The
blades of the propeller are shaped and mounted at an angle so that they are
essentially rotating wings. They scoop and deﬂect a quantity of moving air
behind the blade. This creates a pressure diﬀerence across the width of the
propeller blade, pushing the propeller forward, in the direction of the plane’s
forward motion. The faster the propeller blades rotate, the more air they
deﬂect behind them, and the faster the plane moves in the desired direction.
                                    FIGURE 5


   The larger the plane, the greater its weight, and for a given wing size, the
faster it must move in order to achieve suﬃcient lifting force under the wings
to raise the plane oﬀ the ground. The energy to rotate the propeller comes
from the combustion of fossil fuel, essentially the same physics that leads to
rotational kinetic energy in a car. Greater speeds, necessary for larger lifting
forces, are achieved using a jet engine.
   A jet engine may not look like it, but it is essentially an internal
combustion cylinder, as found in a gasoline-fueled car, just turned on its side.
Cold air is drawn into the front of the jet engine, via rotating turbine blades.
This cold air is compressed, greatly increasing its temperature. The hot gas is
now mixed with jet fuel, and a spark ignites the mixture, inducing
combustion. The now very-much-hotter gas is expelled out the back of the
engine, through a narrow vent that helps speed the hot gas even more. This
ejection of hot gas toward the back of the plane provides a forward thrust,
through Newton’s third law. Unlike the cylinder in the internal combustion
engine, these four steps occur continuously in a jet engine, pushing the large
airplane forward at speeds great enough to enable upward lift.
   For the airplane, the rotational speed of the propeller, or the forward thrust
of the jet engine, must increase along with the plane’s velocity, in order to
counter air resistance. This drag is reduced at higher altitudes, where the
density of air is lower. However, the thinner the atmosphere, the less air there
is to push upward against the wings to provide lift, so one must still maintain
a very high speed in order to ﬂy at elevated altitudes.


In an impressively short amount of time, your plane is passing through
the clouds and climbing to its cruising altitude. You peer through the
window and spend a few minutes quietly relaxing, letting go of the
stress of the morning. The expanse of blue sky is calming, and you
remind yourself that you are lucky to be living when you are—a
hundred years ago, such vistas were not routinely available. You spot
a striking cloud formation that extends for miles. You take out your
smartphone and snap a digital photograph of the clouds.
                                       —
   Two important steps are needed in order to photograph the image of the
clouds using your phone: recording incident photons via quantities of electric
charge that remain localized at the positions (the pixels) where the photons
are absorbed; and, once the photo has been taken, measuring how much
electric charge sits at every position in the image. The ﬁrst step is
accomplished with a light-emitting diode run backward—that is, a light-
absorbing diode, otherwise known as a solar cell or “photodiode.” The second
step involves arrays of capacitors that store these charges.
   Sitting at each pixel is a photodiode that, through the absorption of light,
generates electric charges. This device consists of a silicon chip sandwich,
with pure silicon as the “meat” and silicon with intentionally added chemical
impurities as the top and bottom pieces of “bread.” The top slice has
phosphorus added to the silicon, increasing the number of electrons in the
normally empty upper “balcony” band of states. The lower slice has boron
incorporated into the silicon, which pulls electrons out of the lower-energy
band (which is typically completely ﬁlled), eﬀectively adding holes to the
layer. The net result of these impurity-added layers of silicon is the creation
of an electric ﬁeld across the pure silicon material in the center.
   This electric ﬁeld is important, for it will move the electric charges to
where we want them. In the auditorium model of solid-state physics, if a
photon of light strikes the cell with enough energy to promote an electron to
the upper band of states, leaving a hole in the lower band, then the electric
ﬁeld across the semiconductor will push these charges in opposite directions.
The electrons will pile up on one side of the “sandwich,” and the holes will
accumulate on the other. The more photons that are absorbed, the more
charges will be sent to the opposite sides of the device. In pre-digital
photographic ﬁlm, light was absorbed by small grains of silver halide that
underwent a chemical reaction, permanently altering the ﬁlm. In a digital
camera the charges from the photodiode are stored in a reusable capacitor. At
each pixel the plates of a capacitor hold the electrons from the photodiode at
that location, and it is this charge that will be read out in the next step.
   Accounting for the charges stored on one million capacitors arranged in
rows (where there are one thousand rows with a thousand capacitors in each
row), requires careful timing and coordination. You want to make sure that
the charge determined to be on the capacitor in the 347th row and 589th
column is assigned to that unique location, all in under a second. The trick to
accomplishing this accurate and speedy read-out is the “bucket brigade
principle.”
   In each row is a long line of capacitors, each with a certain amount of
stored charge. It’s easy to read out the charge on the ﬁrst capacitor. A voltage
is applied that pulls this charge to a reference capacitor, just to the left at the
end of the row. The charge across the reference capacitor induces a voltage
that is detected and ampliﬁed using a transistor. The resulting voltage is
converted into a digital signal using binary math, and this number is stored in
a computer’s memory. So now the capacitor adjacent to the end of the row on
the left is empty, but we need to gain access to the charge on the next
capacitor over.
   In the bucket brigade method, the “pail” at the end of the line is emptied
into a measuring barrel and then the pail next to it dumps its contents into the
ﬁrst pail. The third pail then sends its contents to the newly emptied second
pail, the fourth pail transfers to the third pail, and so on. Instead of containing
water, the capacitive buckets hold a quantity of electric charge, but the
principle is the same. The positive voltage that emptied the ﬁrst capacitor at
the end of the row will attract the electrons that are held in the second
capacitor until all of the electrons that were on the second capacitor have
swung over to the ﬁrst capacitor and then swung again, to the reference
capacitor (where the charges are measured). The second capacitor is now
empty, and the reference capacitor at the far left-hand end of the row is
holding the charge from the second capacitor. This charge is sent down to the
ampliﬁer to be measured and converted to a voltage. Meanwhile, a positive
voltage is applied to the plates of the now empty second capacitor, attracting
the electrons that are on the third capacitor over. This process continues for
all one thousand capacitors in the row, and for all one thousand rows, until a
million capacitors have been examined and the charges they were storing have
been converted to a set of one million voltages. This array of capacitors, read
out in this manner, is technically termed a “charge-coupled device,” or CCD.
   The key to making this system work is coordination. In order to store the
voltage on a memory chip in the proper sequence, so that the information
encoded in the sequence of charges can be reconstructed into the original
image, it is crucial that all of the capacitors transfer their charges down the
line at the proper times. This depends on precise computer clocks that ensure
correct timing.
   The procedure described above will convert a color image into a black-
and-white photo, albeit with a ﬁne gray scale at every individual pixel. That
is, the magnitude of the charge, and hence voltage recorded from each
capacitor, depends on the number of photons striking that picture element’s
light sensor, and because this voltage can have any value, it can capture
shades of gray. One technique in digital photography to create color photos
involves dividing each sensor into four equal, smaller squares. Over each of
these smaller squares is a ﬁlter—red, green, blue, or a clear ﬁlter that allows
all the light onto the detector. The separate charges sent over to the ampliﬁer
at the end of the row keep track of which color’s capacitor is being recorded.
Processing, smoothing, and interpolating the voltages can adjust the color
levels of the reassembled image. One is not limited to the visible portion of
the spectrum. Semiconductor sensors, with much smaller energy gaps
between the ﬁlled lower band and the empty upper band of energy states, can
detect infrared light. As in the case of ﬁlm photography, once a photon is
absorbed and converted into an electronic signal, the rest of the processing is
independent of the wavelength of the light that was detected.
   The development of CCD-enabled cameras has revolutionized
photography. The light from distant galaxies, or the view from a jet plane
ﬂying at over 500 miles per hour, can be accurately recorded using the same
basic technique that Mathew Brady employed in his Civil War–era portraits
when he left the camera’s aperture open and waited for enough photons from
his subject to reach the camera’s detector. Brady’s subjects had to remain
completely still for half a minute in order to avoid blurring of the image, but
modern cameras can take a photo in a fraction of a second.
   The smaller the pixel size, the more picture elements are needed to cover a
given area, and the higher the resolution. This holds equally for cameras and
displays. We have used as an example a digital camera with one thousand
rows containing one thousand sensors, but the million pixels (or one
Megapixel) that this represents is near the low end of present-day resolution.
Today, state-of-the-art resolution for digital cameras is roughly twenty
Megapixels, but when it comes to technology, art never stays in the same state
for long.
   Once the information contained in the stream of photons has been
converted into voltages, these voltages can in turn be transformed into a
sequence of ones and zeros, the precise sequence of which can encode
instructions for which pixels on a display should be activated at which
locations and times. If suﬃcient computer memory is available, then you can
take multiple images—a new one every forty or ﬁfty milliseconds—and this
video image will be described by a much larger set of ones and zeros. It’s
these ones and zeros that you wish to upload onto a remote data storage
center—you want to send your photo of a cloud to the Cloud.


Your phone will automatically save any digital photos you take in your
cloud data storage account. However, with your phone in airplane
mode you have no access to your data provider. You will double-
check when you land that the photo is saved alongside your other
photos and videos. The plane is now well above the clouds, and you
recall that with less atmosphere above you, you will be exposed to
more radiation on this ﬂight than during your doctor’s visit today. This
reminds you to look over your notes for your presentation.
                                       —
   For many of us, the number of ones and zeros that we wish to maintain for
long-term storage eventually exceeds the capacity of our smartphones. It thus
becomes a better choice to keep our data in a “safe-deposit box” that has very
deep drawers. The bank vault that contains all of these virtual, digital
lockboxes is sometimes referred to as “the Cloud.”
   If you are up in an airplane, ﬁve miles above the ground, then you are
roughly ﬁve miles farther away from the Cloud. The information that you
store there resides on the ground, often in the globe’s north. Unlike your local
savings and loan, it does not have a deﬁnite central location; your information
is preserved on a multitude of computer memory banks, referred to as
“servers.”
   When you turn on your phone or tablet, your device runs an instruction set
that tells your display which pixels to light up. Similarly, when you request,
via a Web address, information such as a site (with text, links, and graphics),
a diﬀerent instruction set is sent to your device, which modiﬁes the display
accordingly. The website’s information, the complex pattern of ones and
zeros sent to your tablet, is stored on a server. The totality of the servers that
preserve your information, in a diﬀuse and extended network, is referred to as
a “cloud data storage” system. But care must be taken to make sure that all
this data does not “fry” the servers.
   There is a small but non-zero cost in energy every time a transistor
switches from the low-current “oﬀ” state to the high-current “on” state. If that
energy is not drawn away quickly enough, then the temperature of the
transistor will increase. Temperature is a way of keeping track of the average
energy per atom in an object. In a solid, the atoms are locked into ﬁxed
locations, and the higher the average energy, the more the atoms vibrate
about their equilibrium positions. This shaking can deﬂect an electrical
current away from its trajectory, limiting how large a current can ﬂow for a
given applied voltage. In addition to decreasing the performance of the
transistor, this increased temperature can actually destroy the chip itself. If
the heat is not removed, the buildup of energy can actually raise the
temperature above the melting point of silicon, as many millions of
transistors in a very small volume are switching millions of times a second.
   Heat management is a major issue in the design of computer systems,
particularly when one wants to maximize the speed at which the system
operates. The faster the transistors switch, the shorter the time interval
between changes in current level, and the less time available to remove the
heat generated by this operation.
   There are many diﬀerent companies that provide cloud data storage, and
each one uses a vast array of computer servers, all of which need electrical
power. The data centers run by Google use over two hundred MegaWatts of
power, the equivalent of the output of a small power plant. Multiply this by
the large number of data centers around the world, and it is clear that cloud
storage (and the Internet in general) has a considerable carbon footprint. In
order to save on air-conditioning costs (if the servers overheat, then there go
your saved cat videos), many of these data centers are situated in colder
climates, such as Sweden, Finland, and northern Minnesota.


Satisﬁed that you are ready for your presentation, you take your tablet
out of your bag, along with a headset, intending to pass the remainder
of the ﬂight by watching a video you have downloaded. You are
impressed by the quality of sound provided by the diminutive earbuds.
You turn to the person sitting next to you and see that he is watching
his own video on his tablet, but instead of small earbuds he is wearing
noise-canceling headphones. These headphones are large and
bulky, and you wonder whether they truly cancel the noise or just
muﬄe it.
                                      —
   The earpieces in noise-canceling headphones are large not only to provide
insulation against background sound but also to allow each earpiece to do the
job of a telephone handset. That is, they function both as a microphone—
detecting incoming sound waves, converting them to electrical voltages—and
as speakers that translate these voltages back into sound waves. In order to
cancel the background noise, these new sound waves result in perfect
destructive interference with the incoming sound.
   Sound is manifested by density variations in a medium, typically air. These
density modulations can be smoothly periodic, with a well-deﬁned frequency,
such as result when a single guitar string is plucked, or they can be random
and chaotic, like the roar of the plane engine. Consider the note from a guitar
string. As we have seen, when the string moves toward us, it collides with air
molecules, compressing them with the air molecules in the space ahead of
them, creating a region with a higher-than-average density. As the string then
moves away from us, it leaves behind a space with a lower-than-average
density that also propagates away from the string. When the string vibrates
back toward us, it generates another higher-density packet of air, followed
again by a lower-density region. The back-and-forth vibrations of the string
continuously create alternating variations in the density of the air. The
spacing between adjacent regions of denser air is called the “wavelength.”
Let’s say the density wave resulting from the vibrating string is the note G.
This wave beats a tattoo on our eardrum, causing the membrane to vibrate.
Eventually this mechanical vibration is converted into an electrical signal that
is transmitted and processed by our neurons, which interpret the incoming
signal as the note G.
   But now imagine that before this wave reaches our ear, it collides with
another wave that represents the same note. Everything in the second wave is
identical to the ﬁrst, with one crucial diﬀerence: this second wave is perfectly
out of phase with the ﬁrst one, so that whenever the ﬁrst wave has a region of
higher density, the second wave has a region of lower density, and vice versa.
In order to create this second wave, you just need another guitar string, which
you pluck exactly as you did the ﬁrst, but taking care that when the ﬁrst string
is moving down, the second string is moving up. When these two waves meet,
the higher-than-average density regions ﬁt snugly into the lower-than-average
density regions, restoring the air to its average density at all points in space.
The second wave eﬀectively makes it as if the ﬁrst wave didn’t exist. Air with
a uniform average density is just air—and the guitar note G disappears. The
ﬁrst guitar string created a sound wave, and the second string generated an
anti-wave—canceling it out.
   What can be done with one single note can be done with many diﬀerent
notes. The vibrations of the plane’s engines are transmitted through the frame
of the wing to the fuselage, and from there to the air in the pressurized cabin.
These sound waves are distinct from music or conversation, as the plane’s
background noise has a broad range of frequencies, all competing for
attention when they strike your eardrum. Imagine you are eavesdropping on a
conversation across a large, empty room. With eﬀort you can make out what
is being said. But if the room is hosting a large party, with dozens and dozens
of couples all having their own conversations, it would be much harder to
continue to listen in on one particular discussion. Regular headphones will
block some of the background noise while piping in the desired signal directly
to your ear, but some of the noise will still get through, making it harder for
you to concentrate on what the headphones are playing.
   Noise-canceling headphones record the conversations of everyone else in
the party, and instantly generate anti-waves that negate their sound waves.
The microphone built into the headphones detects the incoming sounds,
converts the density waves into corresponding voltage variations, and quickly
analyzes the input. Once the noise has been analyzed, it is a straightforward
mathematical procedure to ﬂip the phase, creating an exact anti-noise voltage.
This voltage is sent to speakers in the headphone that generate a mechanical
sound wave canceling out the incoming noise wave. Since the speed of the
electronic processors built into the headphones is many times faster than that
of sound, the headphones can compensate when the noise changes, always
creating a near-perfect cancelation.
Before your video is ﬁnished, the captain’s voice comes on to
announce that your ﬂight has begun its descent. You are asked to put
away any personal items you may have removed during the ﬂight and
turn oﬀ any electronic devices until the plane has landed. You stow
your tablet and earbuds, and soon enough you are on the ground.
After deboarding the plane, you retrieve your luggage that was gate-
checked. You join the crowd of people exiting the airport. The line for
a taxi is way too long, so you decide to take the light-rail train to your
downtown destination. Thinking about the quick and eﬃcient light-rail
system, you muse that had there been a high-speed train alternative
to the ﬂight, you’d have taken it.
                                       —
   From a physics perspective, the essential issues for a light-rail train are
basically the same as for an all-electric car. However, the ﬁxed track provides
yet another option for propulsion that can be employed in high-speed trains—
magnets.
   Why are some materials magnetic in the ﬁrst place? The constituents of
atoms—the protons, neutrons, and electrons—all have a small built-in
magnetic ﬁeld, like a compass needle, accounted for by quantum mechanics.
In an MRI scanner, the intrinsic magnetic ﬁeld of the atoms’ nuclei enabled
us to image the inside of your body. The magnetism of conventional magnets
(bar magnets or horseshoe magnets) arises from the magnetic ﬁeld of the
electrons in iron atoms. While most atoms have their electrons form pairs,
north pole to south pole, so that the two of them together have no net
magnetic ﬁeld, in a few cases (such as iron or cobalt) a number of unpaired
electrons (though not all of them) have their north and south poles all
pointing in the same direction, giving the atom a net magnetic ﬁeld. The
natural tendency of the iron atoms is to have their magnetic ﬁelds point in the
same direction, and a solid piece of iron can be magnetized, creating a large
magnetic ﬁeld in the space around it. Bring two such magnets together, with
their north poles facing each other, and there will be a strong force pushing
them apart. In this repulsive conﬁguration, if one magnet is on the railroad
track, and the other is on the train, this repelling force can be greater than the
weight of the train (provided the magnets are strong enough), which will
levitate above the track.
   This repulsion between similar magnetic poles is how magnetically
levitating trains (“maglev,” for short) ﬂoat. But they don’t use iron bar
magnets; instead, maglev relies on powerful electromagnets. We have invoked
the very deep connection between electricity and magnetism, exploited in the
motor of your electric toothbrush and the transformer in its recharger.
Moving electric charges create magnetic ﬁelds, and changing magnetic ﬁelds
can induce electrical currents. In order to generate magnetic ﬁelds large
enough to lift a train oﬀ the track, a very large electrical current is required.
   The track that guides the maglev train consists of electromagnets that both
levitate and propel the train. A coil that will generate a magnetic ﬁeld is on
the bottom of the train. If the current ﬂows clockwise around the coil, then
the north pole points out of one end of the coil, and if the current is made to
ﬂow in the counterclockwise direction, then a south magnetic pole comes out
of the coil. The current in the coils in the electromagnet in front of the train is
set up so that as it generates a north pole magnetic ﬁeld, it is attracted to the
region of the track with a south pole, pulling the train down the track. As
soon as the coil is aligned with this south-pole region of the track, the current
in the coil is reversed so that now it generates a south pole—pushing the train
away from this track section and toward the next, which has a north pole.
With a computer guiding the ﬂipping electrical current, the changing current
in the coil will continue to pull the train faster and faster down the track.
Another set of coils lifts the train up oﬀ the track, so the friction between the
rotating wheels and the track is eliminated. Magnetically levitated train
speeds of over 200 miles per hour are possible.


On the light-rail train, you take out your smartphone and connect to
your data provider. You verify that your photo of clouds has indeed
been stored in your Cloud account. You then call up on a Web
browser a map of the light-rail train you are riding and cross-check it
with the downtown oﬃce building that is your destination. Six more
stops to go. You have enough time to reﬂect on what you are going to
say.
*1 The energy recovered is actually less than the energy expended charging the terminals,
 due to thermodynamic considerations, but this technicality is small comfort if your battery
 explodes.
*2 Wood has many small pockets of air that lower its overall density, whereas when fully
 saturated with water, wood will sink to the bottom of a body of water.
                              CHAPTER SIX




                 You Give a Business Presentation



You get oﬀ at your stop, two blocks from the oﬃce building where your
meeting is being held. As in most American cities, downtown is laid
out on a uniform rectangular grid, and once you ﬁgure out the correct
direction, it’s easy to ﬁnd your destination. Arriving at the building, you
check the directory and hop in an elevator, riding it to the twenty-third
ﬂoor. After you introduce yourself to the receptionist, she telephones
your host. A few minutes later you are led down a hallway to the
meeting room where you will give your presentation. It’s a fair-sized
room, and your host indicates that over ﬁfty people are expected to
attend. Your talk is scheduled to begin in twenty minutes, and while
you have a coﬀee, you try to connect your tablet to the LCD projector.
You have some trouble getting your tablet to communicate to the
projector. Fortunately you have a backup copy of your presentation on
a USB flash drive, which you use to load your talk onto a computer
in the meeting room. After verifying that the ﬁle opens and is still
properly formatted, you are ready to begin.
                                     —
  Computers register ones and zeros using semiconductor transistors that
represent these values through high and low current levels, respectively. The
cool thing about semiconductors is that their electrical resistance can be
dramatically changed either by adding tiny amounts of other chemical
elements (the basis of solar-cell and light-emitting diodes) or by applying an
electric ﬁeld (in a transistor).
   To make a transistor, start with a capacitor consisting of two metal plates
with a thin insulator (such as glass) between them, and replace one of the
metal plates with a semiconductor, such as silicon. In a regular capacitor, a
positive voltage is applied to one plate, and the metal sheet acquires a positive
charge. This large positive charge attracts electrons to the second plate,
leaving this sheet with a negative charge. When the second plate is a
semiconductor rather than a metal, the same thing happens. The electrons in
the silicon are attracted to the side of the silicon facing the metal plate.
Previously, this region of the semiconductor at the interface with the
insulating glass had only a few spare electrons to carry a current, but now the
density of charges on the surface is much higher, and a larger current results
across this region.*1 By applying a voltage to the metal plate, we can
dramatically increase the current that can ﬂow through the semiconductor.
When a larger current moves through it, that can represent a “one” in the
computer memory, and when no voltage is applied, then there is a very small
current through the silicon (a “zero” in this case). This phenomenon—in
which changing the charges on the bottom metal plate sets up an electric ﬁeld
that changes the resistance of the semiconductor—is called the “ﬁeld eﬀect,”
and the entire device is referred to as a ﬁeld eﬀect transistor, or FET.
   The trouble with this transistor structure is that the device will have a high
current, and thus register a “one,” only when a voltage is sent to the metal
plate. The energy to supply this voltage in your computer comes from the
battery, or from a power plant if the computer is connected to a wall outlet.
As soon as the voltage is turned oﬀ, the excess charge on the metal plate
ﬂows away, and the transistor reverts to its low-current state. So all of the
information stored in the sequence of ones and zeros is lost, as all of the
transistors default to the zero state, unless you have transferred the digital
information to a more permanent storage medium, such as a magnetic hard
drive.
   A USB*2 memory stick maintains the information of the high-current state
of the transistors, even when disconnected from a power supply. In order to
keep the transistor in a high-current state, a third metal plate, buried within
the insulating glass between the ﬁrst metal and the semiconductor, is used to
store the electrical charges needed to keep the silicon in the “on” state.
   The insulating glass layer in a transistor is typically very thin, only about
one hundred nanometers thick (one nanometer is one-billionth of a meter and
is the length of three atoms laid end-to-end). For a transistor in a USB drive,
another metal plate is added, identical to the bottom electrode but
sandwiched in the insulating layer, only ten nanometers beneath the silicon.
This metal is not connected to any outside wires, so ordinarily it plays no role
in the operation of the transistor. But if the semiconductor’s wires are shorted
out and a large voltage is applied to the bottom metal electrode (sometimes
called the “gate electrode” because the voltage applied to it allows a large
current to ﬂow in the top semiconductor, like swinging open a gate), then
some of the charges can eﬀectively jump*3 through the insulator and embed
themselves onto this buried metal plate. Since the buried plate is not
connected to anything, these charges will stay on this plate until a
compensating voltage is applied, canceling it out. Until that voltage erases
them, the charges on the plate inside the insulating glass induce an oppositely
charged conducting channel in the semiconductor. This “ﬂoating-gate ﬁeld
eﬀect transistor” will maintain its highly conductive “on” state, even when the
transistor is unplugged from a power supply.
   USB memory drives (also known as a “thumb drives” or “junk drives”), as
well as tablet computers and lightweight, ultra-thin laptops, employ this type
of transistor for long-term data storage. Advances in device manufacture,
similar to those that led to a dramatic increase in the number of transistors on
a chip, have rapidly expanded the capacity of computer memories using these
ﬂoating-gate transistors. Computer hard drives originally employed*4 discs
with magnetic regions to represent the ones and zeros. These discs rotate at
very high speeds, and a magnetic read head, playing the same role as a coil,
would convert these changing magnetic ﬁelds into electrical currents. In
contrast, ﬂoating-gate FET hard drives have no moving parts, and the energy
requirements of this form of computer memory are much lower.


Your host pops back into the meeting room while you are transferring
your talk from the USB drive to the computer and asks if it would be
possible to get a hard copy of your presentation. This would make it
easier for the audience to follow along and take notes during the talk.
You’ve brought along only one copy of printed-out notes and slides for
your presentation, in the interest of not weighing down your luggage
for an overnight trip. Assuring you that this is not a problem, your host
takes your notes and makes copies for everyone at the meeting using
the nearby photocopier.
                                     —
   Prior to the invention of xerography, if you wanted a copy of a document,
you had to generate it when the ﬁrst document was created, using carbon
paper. In a photocopier, the content of one sheet of paper is transferred to
another through a complex dance of optics and electronics.
   A photocopier starts with a semiconductor coated onto the outside of a
cylindrical drum. A wire at a very high voltage is used to spray electrical
charges (let’s say positive charges, for the sake of example) on the
semiconductor’s surface. The document to be copied is placed on a glass
surface above the semiconductor drum. A lamp moves underneath the
document, shining a bright light along the page. Where there is a white space
on the document, this light is reﬂected onto the electrically charged
semiconductor surface; where there is black printing, no light is reﬂected.*5
Any region that is exposed to the reﬂected light has its electrical charge
neutralized, so the dark regions on the original document are now accurately
reproduced by the remaining positively charged regions on the semiconductor
drum. Nonconducting hollow plastic particles ﬁlled with a pigment (called
“toner”) are negatively charged using another wire with a diﬀerent voltage.
The toner is then sprayed onto the semiconductor surface. The negatively
charged toner particles (primarily clumps of carbon atoms, along with some
other chemicals) are attracted to the positively charged regions on the drum
surface that correspond to the black portions of the original document. A
sheet of paper is positively charged, using the wire employed when charging
the drum, and physically placed on the drum, sandwiching the toner between
the semiconductor and the paper. The negatively charged toner particles are
attracted to the positively charged paper, and when the paper is peeled oﬀ the
drum, the toner will come along with it. The paper is then heated, melting the
toner onto the paper, and the electrical charges are neutralized. The paper is
now a copy of the original document.
   As the paper is ejected to the out-tray, a squeegee runs over the surface of
the semiconductor drum, swiping away any leftover toner. This also cancels
any remnant electrical charges on the surface, preparing the drum for another
copy. All this happens, in most photocopiers, in less than a second.*6
   The key to making all this work is that when light shines on the positively
charged semiconducting drum, the charges are conducted away, leaving only
those sections in the dark with a positive charge to attract the negatively
charged toner particles. Light can change the charge of the semiconductor
surface because semiconductors are middling conductors of electricity—not
quite as good as metals but much better than insulators. The seats in the
lower-energy orchestra are all occupied with electrons, and because no two
electrons can sit in the same seat, no current can move if there are no empty
seats for the electrons. When light of the proper wavelength shines on a
semiconductor, its electrical resistance can be dramatically reduced. Some of
the electrons are kicked up into the higher-energy balcony states, and are able
to move from seat to seat in response to an applied voltage, forming an
electrical current. When visible light shines on the positively charged
semiconductor, the conductivity of the illuminated region increases. The
charges in the bright regions can rapidly move away to an electrode on the
opposite side. Charges in the dark cannot move (their resistance is still too
high), and so they remain to attract the negatively charged toner particles.
   A similar mechanism also makes scanners and printers possible. Once the
dark and bright portions of the document are mapped onto pixels on the
semiconductor drum, the distinct regions of high and low charges can be
stored in capacitors at each location. Using charge-coupled devices (think of
a digital camera), they can be read out as a series of voltages and stored in
any computer memory. A hard copy can then be created using this set of
voltages to guide an ink-jet printer. In this device, a sheet of paper is pulled
past a bar, where a belt and pulley manipulate a printing cartridge back and
forth. One form of ink-jet printing uses a reservoir of ink, connected to a
cylinder that has a nozzle through which ink can be sprayed onto the paper.
The ink is ejected when pressure is applied to the top of the cylinder, where a
piezoelectric crystal sits. As the voltage across this crystal is changed, the
crystal either expands, pushing ink out through the nozzle, or contracts,
drawing more ink from the reservoir into the printing cylinder. Converting
documents into a series of voltages, and these voltages back into a printed
copy, is why a single device can function as a scanner, a fax machine, a
printer, and a copier: it’s all the same physics!
   For such a widely used product, the disordered semiconductors essential to
a photocopier are actually very poorly understood. Physicists have a much
deeper understanding of the properties of crystals than they do of disordered
solids. A cubic inch of any given solid contains nearly a trillion trillion atoms.
In order to avoid the headache of solving a trillion trillion equations,
physicists exploit the symmetry of the crystal structure to elucidate the
properties of the material—but it’s impossible to use this shortcut when the
atoms are in a random conﬁguration.
   The semiconductors discussed so far are “crystalline semiconductors.”
Think of a solid composed entirely of carbon atoms, but with every atom
sitting at a very precise location: at the center of a pyramid*7 with other
carbon atoms at the points. Such a conﬁguration is called the “diamond
crystal lattice,” and in fact, what we call “diamond” is carbon atoms in just
such an arrangement. There are diﬀerent types of crystal structures,*8 such as
the structure of table salt, which is a cube, with sodium and chlorine atoms on
opposite corners of the cube, repeated indeﬁnitely. But there are many, many
more ways that atoms can be arranged randomly, as in a disordered or
amorphous structure. The semiconductor drum, a vital part of the copier, is
in fact made up of an amorphous semiconductor (diﬀerent from the
crystalline type).
   The drum or belt in a photocopier utilizes an amorphous semiconductor to
keep costs down. To make a large, single crystal of silicon, you start with a
vat of molten silicon. A crystalline seed is dipped into this high-temperature
liquid and slowly retracted, and the silicon that is withdrawn adopts the seed’s
crystal structure as it is raised out of the molten pool. At the end of this slow
and careful process there is a large cylinder of crystalline silicon, with a
diameter of ten to twelve inches. The cylinder is then sliced into thin discs,
like cuts of salami. (To use the entire crystalline cylinder for just one drum in
a photocopier would make these machines so expensive that we would all still
be using carbon paper.) An array of microchips is then fabricated on each
disc through a sequence of chemical and thermal processing steps, and then
the disc is cut into distinct chips that are employed in cell phones, laptop
computers, and other technological devices. But for making copies on 8½"
11" sheets, a disc is not what is needed. When the ﬁrst copy machines were
introduced, the largest cylinder of single-crystal silicon that one could
manufacture was only two to three inches in diameter, insuﬃcient for a
copier. Cutting and gluing together pieces from several discs would leave
unmistakable vertical streaks in the copy along each crystal-section seam.
However, if atoms were essentially randomly deposited onto a surface, an
amorphous semiconductor could cover an area the width of a standard sheet
of paper.
   Photocopiers, from the very ﬁrst Xerox-brand photocopier, have always
used amorphous semiconductors for the drum material. Despite their being
employed in other technologies—such as solar cells, ﬂat panel displays,
scanners and copiers, and x-ray machines (basically, anything that requires
semiconductors to be spread out over large ﬂat areas)—scientists have an
incomplete picture of how they work. Research continues, with the hope that
a better understanding will result in better devices.


Your host returns with the copies, and you connect the cable from the
computer you are borrowing to the LCD projector in the meeting
room. A moment of anxiety as to whether this computer will work is
allayed when the desktop is projected on the presentation screen.
                                     —
    A simple slide projector shines a bright light through a small photograph
printed on transparent plastic, whereas an LCD (liquid crystal display)
projector generates, from a digital ﬁle on your computer, a virtual
photographic slide that can be projected onto a screen.
    A liquid crystal is a true ﬂuid, with all of a liquid’s characteristic
properties: it ﬁlls up the volume of its container, and when the container is
tilted, the collection of molecules ﬂows and pours like any other viscous
liquid. But there is also an underlying order to the arrangement of the liquid
crystal’s molecular units—as one would ﬁnd in a crystal. Most crystalline
solids have single atoms or small molecules as the basic elements periodically
repeated throughout the material; in liquid crystals this role is ﬁlled by larger,
carbon-based molecules. The properties of these molecules are very sensitive
to their detailed chemical components and their bonding arrangements.
Depending on the precise composition and how the molecules interact, they
can be randomly arranged as in a normal liquid, but when the temperature is
lowered they may adopt a less random conﬁguration.
   Unlike the melting of ice or the boiling of water, the transitions that liquid
crystals undergo involve less dramatic rearrangements of the molecules. For
example, certain long-chain molecules, due to electrostatic interactions with
their neighbors, can arrange themselves so that they all line up pointing
essentially the same way, like a large number of toothpicks in a long narrow
box (this is called the “nematic” phase). Lower the temperature, and the
molecules now have even less thermal (that is, kinetic) energy. They are thus
susceptible to another weak electrostatic interaction and line up in another
pattern. The beauty and power of liquid crystals is that, for certain molecules,
this transition from one molecular arrangement to another can be achieved by
applying an external electric ﬁeld across the cell in which the liquid resides.
                                   FIGURE 6.1


   It is this feature of liquid crystals that is exploited in LCD projectors, as
well as in ﬂat panel displays like tablets or televisions. The screen is divided
into a two-dimensional grid of picture elements (like the ATM touch screen),
where each pixel is a small cell consisting of sheets of glass held a small
distance apart, and between the sheets is the liquid crystal. The front and
back sheets of glass have polarizers that will only pass light whose electric
ﬁeld is oriented in a given direction. Ordinary white light is a jumbled mix of
electromagnetic waves with electric ﬁelds oscillating in all possible directions.
The polarizer is like the bars in a prison window, and once light passes
through it, the electric ﬁelds will point in the same direction as these
nonconducting bars. One end of the pixel cell has a vertical polarizer, so the
light entering the cell will have oscillating electric ﬁelds in the vertical
direction. The second glass plate has its polarizer oriented horizontally, and as
the electric ﬁelds of the light do not lie in the horizontal direction, none of the
light that makes it through the ﬁrst glass is able to pass through the second
one—that is, unless the liquid crystal between the two polarizers can reorient
the light’s electric ﬁeld.
   A particular liquid crystal molecule is chosen for the LCD pixel, so that the
long axis of the molecule lines up in the direction of the vertical polarizer’s
lines on one glass plate. The molecules on the other side of the plate align
with the horizontal polarizer orientation. Between these two plates, the liquid
crystal molecules undergo a gentle twist from the vertical to the horizontal
alignment. The liquid crystal guides the electric ﬁeld of the light, as it follows
the orientation of the molecules. The electric ﬁeld of the vertically polarized
light rotates so that it is in the horizontal plane when it reaches the second
polarizer. So this pixel will be bright when light shines through it.
   If a voltage as low as ﬁve Volts is applied across the two glass plates (using
transparent conductors such as indium tin oxide, as in touch screen displays),
then the liquid crystal undergoes a transition into a diﬀerent conﬁguration.
The electric ﬁeld of the light now does not rotate from the vertical to the
horizontal, and thus no light is able to pass through the now dark pixel.*9 By
changing the voltage applied to each pixel in the array and using ﬁlters, we
can generate a color image.


Your ﬁrst slide is projected on the screen, and you test out the small,
handheld laser pointer that you’ll use to indicate various features and
bullet points in your presentation. The bright green dot is clearly
visible even at the back of the room.
                                        —
   Laser pointers, bar-code readers, and DVD and Blu-ray players all employ
a device called a “laser diode,” a reﬁnement of a light-emitting diode.
   A diode consists of two semiconductors placed together, with electrical
leads arranged so that the current must pass through ﬁrst one material and
then the other. Recall the analogy of semiconductors as an auditorium with a
ﬁlled lower-level orchestra, every seat occupied by an electron, and an empty
upper-level balcony. Electrons can carry a current only if they move from one
seat to an empty adjacent seat. The ﬁlled orchestra cannot carry a current, as
there are no empty seats for the electrons to move into; nor can the balcony,
for while it has plenty of empty seats it has no electrons. Imagine a
semiconductor in which a small amount of a certain chemical impurity has
been added, with the eﬀect that the impurity donates electrons to the balcony,
without taking any out of the lower-energy orchestra. This material will now
be a much better conductor of electricity.
   There are other, diﬀerent chemical impurities that could grab electrons out
of the orchestra, leaving empty seats behind, without adding any electrons to
the balcony. As an electron in the orchestra jumps into a now empty seat, it
leaves an unoccupied space behind, and the missing electron (or “hole”) can
move through the orchestra, carrying a current. The ﬁrst type of impurity
would yield what is referred to as an “n-type semiconductor,” so named
because the mobile charges are negatively charged electrons. The second type
of impurity creates a “p-type semiconductor,” since the holes in the orchestra
act like positively charged particles. A diode is what you get when an n-type
semiconductor is placed next to a p-type semiconductor, and metal leads are
attached to the n-type and p-type sides.
                                  FIGURE 6.2


   When a semiconductor with a lot of electrons but no open seats in the
orchestra (n-type) is placed next to another material with plenty of empty
orchestra seats but no electrons in the balcony (p-type), the extra electrons
from the balcony on one side move over to the balcony on the other side (for
the same reason that people in a crowded room will exit when the door is
unlocked to an adjoining empty room), and this places them above the empty
orchestra seats in the p-type material, allowing them to lower their energy by
dropping down into the unoccupied positions, emitting energy as light or heat
in the process. Most of this recombination takes place at the p–n junction,
where the two materials meet. But the removal of the excess electrons and
holes leaves behind other charges. The impurity atoms added to the two
semiconductors have their own electrical charges (positively charged ions in
the n-type semiconductor and negatively charged ions on the p-type side), and
without the electrons or holes to balance them, they create an internal electric
ﬁeld. This ﬁeld makes the diode a surprisingly versatile device—it’s very hard
for a current to ﬂow against the internal electric ﬁeld (even though there are
empty seats on the balcony available to them), but very easy, if the wires’
polarity is switched, for the current to pass in the direction of the ﬁeld.
   Shine light on the semiconductor, and if the light’s energy is absorbed (that
is, it spans at least the top of the orchestra and the bottom of the balcony),
then an electron and hole are created. These charges suddenly ﬁnd themselves
subject to the built-in electric ﬁeld, and are pushed apart, with the electrons
moving to the n-type side and the holes to the p-type side. As more light is
absorbed, more charges are pushed apart, and a current can be generated
from the p–n junction, just by shining light on it. This is a solar cell, a way to
convert the energy of light directly into an electrical current, without having
to rotate coils in magnetic ﬁelds. This device is also the photodiode that
converted absorbed photons into electrical charges in your digital camera.
   If you force a current to ﬂow in the opposite direction, pushing electrons in
on the n-type side and holes in from the p-type side, they will meet at the p–n
junction between the two materials; when they do, the electrons will fall down
into the empty seats (holes) in the orchestra, and release their energy as light.
This is a light-emitting diode (LED), and it is nothing more than a solar cell
run in reverse. That is, for a solar cell, light goes in and current comes out,
while for an LED, current goes in and light comes out. Same device, just run
forward or backward.
   In an incandescent lightbulb, a large current is passed through a small wire,
and the kinetic energy of the electrical current is transferred to the wire,
making it white-hot. Just as for a toaster wire, a great deal of the current’s
energy goes into heating the wire, and only a fraction of it is converted into
light. But in an LED, there is little heat generated. Instead, the electrical
current’s energy is converted directly into light, which is why LED lightbulbs
are much more energy eﬃcient.*10
   To turn an LED into a semiconductor laser, the device is structured to
delay the spontaneous recombination of the electrons and holes in the p–n
junction region. Then, one photon of light with exactly the right energy
stimulates the recombination of an electron and hole, inducing the creation of
a second photon of light at the same moment. These two photons will thus be
exactly in phase (their electric and magnetic ﬁelds will oscillate in unison),
and they will furthermore induce light emission for the next electron and hole
that enter the p–n junction region. Some of the light travels parallel to the
junction, without passing through either the n-type or p-type semiconductor
layers. The spontaneous emission of light is slow in this region. To speed up
the stimulated emission, edges of the junction are polished like a mirror so
that this light is reﬂected back and forth, continually stimulating the incoming
electrons and holes to recombine and emit light in phase with the reﬂected
light beam. A small aperture with a focusing lens on one of the polished sides
lets some of the light out, all of a single wavelength and in phase. It’s all
traveling in the same direction,*11 and this beam of coherent light is termed a
“laser,” an acronym for light ampliﬁed by the stimulated emission of radiation.
   The laser pointer has a small battery to provide the voltage that forces the
electrons and holes in opposition to the built-in p–n junction electric ﬁeld,
thus generating the laser beam. The ﬁrst semiconductor laser diodes emitted
light in the infrared portion of the spectrum (not too useful for a pointer
during a presentation, but good enough for CD players). Advances in
materials research and manufacturing led to the development of visible red-
light semiconductor lasers (used in DVD players), then green, and ﬁnally
blue-violet semiconductor lasers (Blu-ray players) that are reliable and (most
important) inexpensive. The laser scanners used to read bar codes run a laser
beam across the black and white stripes, and measure the reﬂected light from
the white regions. This generates a sequence of high and low light intensities
that encode information, just like the arrangement of magnetic regions in the
stripe on your credit card. The QR symbol on your smartphone does the same
thing, but it can represent a hundred times more information, being a two-
dimensional sequence of white and dark regions, rather than the one-
dimensional bar code.
You begin speaking, thanking everyone for taking the time to be here.
Your host points out that it is diﬃcult for those in the back to hear you.
A small clip-on microphone is quickly procured, and the speaker
system is turned on. You attach the microphone to your shirt and, after
verifying that the sound level is not too loud, you again begin your
presentation.
                                      —
   A microphone is a device for converting sound waves into electrical
voltages in such a way that the information encoded in the sound’s changing
amplitude and wavelength is preserved in the voltage variations. These
voltages can then be electronically ampliﬁed, and when sent to a speaker, the
original sounds can be made much louder. The development of techniques for
translating variations of air pressure into voltages led to changes not just in
the technology of telephones, broadcasting, and recording, but even in styles
of popular music.
   Microphones in early models of landline telephones would exploit the
electrical properties of soot, and consisted of a cylinder containing small
grains of amorphous carbon particulates, randomly packed together. These
grains were jammed into the cylinder, with the top lid connected to a fabric
membrane. When you spoke into the receiver of the phone, the variations in
air pressure from your voice would cause the membrane to oscillate. Higher
pitches would cause the membrane to vibrate back and forth faster than lower
ones, and the amplitude of vibrations would reﬂect how loud you were
speaking. Downward strokes would compress the carbon grains, while the
pressure on the grains was released on the upswing. The contacts between
grains would change depending on how hard the cylinder was squeezed.
Carbon grains are pretty good conductors of electricity (not as good as a
metal, but better than an insulator), and the ability of the cylinder ﬁlled with
carbon particles to conduct a current when a voltage is applied across the
cylinder is very, very sensitive to the average spacing of the grains. Two
grains that are not in contact will not let a current ﬂow, and those that are
pressed tightly together will have a lower resistance than those that barely
touch. When you speak into the microphone, the resistance of the collection
of carbon grains varies precisely in proportion to the changes in air pressure
from your speech, and the resulting modulations in the current passing
through the cylinder will, when converted to a voltage, provide an electrical
representation of your sound waves.
   However, while it is adequate for speech, the frequency ﬁdelity of the
carbon-grain microphone is somewhat lacking. Any settling of the carbon
grains would produce random changes in the current, which is what creates
the crackling noise associated with these types of microphones. Research and
development in the 1920s and 1930s of an alternative microphone based on
capacitors gave a signiﬁcant boost to a new type of popular singer. Unlike the
older generation of songsmiths, for whom projection was a key to success
(before the carbon-based microphone, singers would use a megaphone to
ensure that their voice was heard at the back of the auditorium), singers were
now able, thanks to the capacitor-based technology, to move closer to the
microphone, crooning in a more intimate voice.
   In a condenser microphone (“condenser” is just another term for
“capacitor”), the membrane that vibrates due to incident sound waves is one
plate of a parallel-plate capacitor. The ability of this device to store charge is
highly sensitive to the separation of the plates. When this membrane ﬂexes
back and forth due to changes in air pressure, it decreases or increases the
distance between the two plates. For a given amount of charge stored on the
capacitor, this leads to a small but measurable change in the voltage across
the capacitor. Capacitors can charge and discharge very quickly, so a properly
designed circuit can quickly and accurately follow the variations in the plate
spacing over a very wide range of frequencies. These microphones are very
sensitive, and they can accurately detect very low-amplitude sound waves, as
very little air mass needs to move to induce a measurable change in the
voltage across the capacitor. Singers no longer needed to shout to be heard,
and popular-music titans like Bing Crosby and Frank Sinatra had
advancements in applied physics to thank for their careers.
   Early radio stations would also use “ribbon microphones,” which employed
a metal sheet moving in the magnetic ﬁeld of a permanent magnet. The
physics is essentially the same as when a conventional speaker is run in
reverse, only instead of a coil of wire, the microphone uses a thin metal strip.
Changes in the amount of magnetic ﬁeld passing through the area of the
metal strip induce a current along its edges. (The metal strip is acting like a
coil of wire, where the change in magnetic ﬂux through the coil induces a
current in the wire.) As the magnetic ﬁeld threading the metal strip varies in
time and amplitude from the incoming sound waves, these variations are
reﬂected in changes in the current in the strip. Any possible note of the
human voice could be accurately captured thanks to the wide frequency range
of the ribbon microphone.
   A microphone that requires less power to operate is desirable when worn
on a lapel, or in mobile phones and other electronic devices where the energy
source is a battery with limited capacity. The “electret microphone”
(“electret” is a portmanteau combining electricity and magnet) is essentially a
condenser or capacitor microphone, except that one of the capacitor plates is
the electrical analog of a magnet, which carries a permanent electrical charge.
A permanent magnet, such as iron, is made up of a multitude of smaller
magnets from the individual iron atoms. Each atom has both a north and a
south magnetic pole. When most of the atoms’ magnetic ﬁelds point in the
same direction, the solid piece of iron will have a large net magnetic ﬁeld. An
electret is similar, except that it has electrical dipoles (that is, a positive and
negative charge separated by a small distance) instead of magnetic dipoles.
Quartz (the crystal conﬁguration of silicon dioxide) is an electret, as are many
long-chain carbon-based polymer molecules.
   There are three major advantages to incorporating electret materials in a
condenser microphone: (1) they are cheap; (2) they are always polarized, so
that no external power supply is needed to maintain a voltage across the
capacitor, where one plate is the electret; and (3) they are cheap! If an
electret is used as one of the plates of a capacitor, then, as it already carries
an electrical charge, no external charging is necessary. The ﬁrst and last
redundant points are obviously very important when dealing with mass-
produced consumer electronics. Although they do not have anywhere near the
frequency ﬁdelity of larger-scale condenser microphones or ribbon
microphones, electret microphones can be small, lightweight, and
inexpensive. Consequently, nearly every portable electronic device you own
that can function as a telephone, including your smartphone as well as noise-
canceling headphones, most likely employs an electret microphone.
You begin your presentation: “Thank you all for coming. As you know,
everyone loves handheld personal electronic devices, but some folks
are concerned as to whether these products are safe. For example,
people want improved phone reception, but they are nervous about
being near cell phone towers. My goal today is to provide background
information about what radiation is, so that we can assist our clients
in making informed decisions about this topic.”
                                      —
   Any energy emission—whether of sound, electromagnetic waves, or high-
speed subatomic particles (electrons, protons, neutrons, or combinations
thereof) ejected from a nucleus—is termed “radiation” by physicists. The
music you listened to from your speakers this morning radiated to all points
in the room, so that you could hear it as you moved around while preparing
breakfast. The information requested by your smart tablet as you checked
your ﬂight’s status was broadcast from a wi-ﬁ router radiating electromagnetic
waves in the radio portion of the spectrum. Images of your ankle were taken
using x-ray radiation. When passing through TSA, your luggage received
additional screening via the explosive-trace detector, which used nuclear
radiation to electrically charge the molecules to be measured in the ion
mobility spectrometer. Radiation can be harmful, it can be useful, or it may
not do anything at all. The key issue isn’t the radiation, but what it does when
incident on molecules. If it removes one or more electrons—so that the
resulting molecule is now an electrically charged positive ion—then this is
termed “ionizing radiation.” As a general rule, any radiation of energy equal
to or less than that of visible light is non-ionizing.
   The atoms in any molecule are held together by chemical bonds, and the
energy needed to break a chemical bond is roughly a few electron-Volts.*12
Some chemical bonds can be snapped with much less energy, and some are
much tougher and require many electron-Volts to break, but if you said it
takes a couple of electron-Volts to break a bond, usually you would not be far
oﬀ. A chemical bond involves interactions between the electrons from two
neighboring atoms, and if incident radiation has enough energy to remove an
electron, then the bond is compromised. A radio wave photon has an energy
of a billionth of an electron-Volt, a microwave’s energy is a millionth of an
electron-Volt, and the energy of an infrared light photon is between a
hundredth and a tenth of an electron-Volt. Any electromagnetic radiation in
this part of the electromagnetic spectrum is non-ionizing. Visible light
photons have an energy of two to four electron-Volts, depending on the color;
an ultraviolet photon’s energy amounts to approximately ten to a hundred
electron-Volts; x-rays have an energy of a thousand electron-Volts; and the
highest-energy region of the spectrum, termed “gamma ray” light, has
energies of about a million electron-Volts. X-rays, gamma rays, and some
ultraviolet light rays fall into the category of ionizing radiation. Then there is
the energy emitted in the form of high-speed particles from a nucleus, which
typically have energies of ﬁve to ten million electron-Volts, and is most
deﬁnitely ionizing radiation.


“Wait a minute,” someone in the meeting room interrupts. “Microwave
ovens just use microwaves to cook food quickly. Then why do we say,
when using one, that we are ‘nuking’ our food, if it has nothing to do
with nuclear radiation?” You nod, note that this is an excellent
question, and reply: “Microwave ovens were developed by scientists
and engineers who use the term ‘radiation’ for any type of energy, from
fast-moving particles emitted from nuclei, to the glow of light from a
candle or an incandescent lightbulb. Microwave ovens use
electromagnetic waves created by a device that is electronically
similar to a radio broadcaster. The microwaves generated in the oven
induce polar molecules—such as the water in your food—to move
rapidly back and forth, through interactions with the microwave’s
electric ﬁeld, just like a compass needle can be made to point in a
given direction by an external magnetic ﬁeld. The microwave’s electric
ﬁeld oscillates with a frequency of several billion cycles per second,
and the water molecules ﬂip at this rate, transferring this rotational
kinetic energy to other molecules throughout your food. Microwaves
and radio waves easily pass through solid objects (which is why we
can pick up a radio station or get a cell phone signal when we’re
inside a building), so the microwaves penetrate into the interior of the
food and all points heat at the same time—rather than the heat having
to start at the outside and diﬀuse into the center—which is why the
cooking time is much shorter than in standard ovens. Some
expressions, such as ‘nuking your food,’ just caught on, but the
microwave in your kitchen has nothing to do with nuclear physics.”
                                      —
   To understand why some nuclei emit radiation, we ﬁrst have to address
why they stay together in the ﬁrst place. In the heart of all atoms is the
nucleus, consisting of a number of protons and neutrons packed into a very
small volume. All the protons have a positive charge, while the neutrons are
electrically uncharged. The positively charged protons repel each other, and
they should ﬂy away from the nucleus as soon as it is formed. Fortunately
there is a stronger force operating within the nucleus, holding it all together.
This force is called the Strong Force, and while it is approximately one
hundred times stronger than the electrical force pushing the protons apart, it
operates only over very short distances (roughly the diameter of a neutron).
This is fortuitous, because if it had a long range, then such an intense
attractive force would pull the nuclei from all atoms together into one giant
sphere of protons and neutrons. So, if the Strong Force were too weak, all
nuclei would ﬂy apart due to the repulsion of protons, and if the Strong Force
were too strong, all nuclei would be pulled into a single mass.
   The larger the nucleus (that is, the more protons and neutrons it contains),
the harder it is to pack them all together, balancing the repulsion of the
protons with the very short-range attraction of protons and neutrons via the
Strong Force. In fact, many nuclei do indeed fall apart, either partially or
completely, or at least settle down in a more stable conﬁguration,*13 with the
emission of radiation as a consequence. These nuclei are termed
“radioactive.”
   Once a nucleus has moved to a lower-energy, stable conﬁguration, it
typically is no longer radioactive. However, a cubic inch of uranium contains
nearly a trillion trillion atoms, and at any given moment some of them will be
emitting radiation. The precise moment when a particular unstable isotope
will emit radiation is random, and can happen right away, or much later. It’s
not unlike rolling dice—one can get a “seven” in the ﬁrst try, or only after
many rolls. The “half-life” is the time one has to wait until, on average, half
of all the nuclei in a material have emitted their radiation. In general, the
quicker the nuclei decay, the shorter the half-life and the sooner the mass will
exhaust all its radioactive isotopes and no longer be able to emit radiation.
   The energy needed to conﬁne protons in close proximity inside the nucleus
is very high, so when an unstable nucleus relaxes to a lower energy state, the
energy it gives oﬀ in the form of radiation is also very large. The predominant
forms of radiation emitted from unstable nuclei are in the form of two
protons and two neutrons tightly bound (called “alpha particles”), high-speed
electrons (called “beta particles”), or gamma or x-ray electromagnetic waves.
This nomenclature dates from their discoveries at the turn of the twentieth
century, before the inner workings of the atom were well understood.
   It is very easy for either the positively charged alpha particles, the
negatively charged beta particles, or the gamma rays, when they strike some
other matter, to lose a small fraction of their kinetic energy and eject some of
the electrons from the target atom, continuing on at high speed, ready to
ionize the next atom they encounter. Some explosive-trace detectors
employed by the TSA use a form of nickel that emits beta particles, while
other versions use a heavier atom, americium, to emit alpha particles and
ionize the molecules to be tested in the ion mobility spectrometer.
   While ions occur naturally in the cell, too high a concentration can cause
genetic damage, which is why high exposure to ionizing radiation can lead to
severe illness and death. Of course, if the cells are already dead, as in meat or
vegetables to be sold at market, then exposure to radiation will not cause
further harm—but it can kill any still-living bacteria on the food. One way to
eliminate the bacteria responsible for salmonella and other diseases is to
expose the food to ionizing radiation (gammas, x-rays, or beta particles). This
accomplishes the same result, as far as killing unwanted bacteria, as does
cooking, without having to raise the temperature of the food. Food that has
been exposed to radiation is described as being “irradiated.” The damage
done to the cells by the ionizing radiation does not result in new, unstable
radioactive nuclei, and thus irradiated food is not itself radioactive. This
confusion between “radioactive” and “irradiated” is unfortunate, with the very
terms so emotionally charged that many will avoid any process that involves
nuclear decay, even at the cost of preventable sickness and death.
*1 Of course, by making one side of the silicon a better conductor of electricity, we have
 done so at the expense of making the other side an even worse conductor. But when you try
 to pass a current through a material, it will ﬂow where it is easiest (the “path of least
 resistance”) and we will see a larger current through the silicon resulting from the voltage
 applied to the bottom metal plate.
*2 USB stands for “universal serial bus”—which describes the thin rectangular connector that
 plugs into your laptop or tablet. USB was set as a standard design by the computer industry
 so that diﬀerent devices could be connected with a single type of cable.
*3 The charges get to the buried plate through a quantum mechanical process termed
 “tunneling,” but we don’t need to know the details.
*4 And many still do.
*5 For simplicity, we’ll restrict ourselves to black-and-white copying.
*6 To quote David Owen, in a 1986 article: the Xerox machine “is a marvel of extremely
 intricate engineering that, like the Post Oﬃce, actually works much better than one has any
 right to expect.”
*7 Technically termed a “tetrahedron.”
*8 The number of unique possible crystal structures is, however, surprisingly low.
*9 Because the light emitted from a liquid crystal display is polarized, when you view such
 displays while wearing polarizing sunglasses, you can see interference patterns due to the
 diﬀerent polarizers.
*10 All light from an LED will be of the same energy (and hence wavelength) determined by
 the diﬀerence between the bottom of the balcony and the top of the orchestra. It takes
 several diﬀerent LEDs to make a white-light LED, each emitting light of a diﬀerent color,
 which appears white when combined.
*11 A laser beam exhibits very little spreading from the source of emission, such that it
 appears invisible from the pointer until it reaches the screen. Irregularities in the screen
 scatter the light in all directions, so that we can see it. To view a laser beam in transit from
 the pointer to the screen, you must ﬁrst create small particulates to scatter the beam into
 your ﬁeld of vision. In the classroom, one could beat two chalk erasers together, creating a
 cloud of dust, or use the smoke from a lit cigarette—but both chalk erasers and cigarettes
 have been banished from classrooms and conference rooms.
*12 An “electron-Volt” is a unit of energy used by physicists; one electron-Volt is the gain in
 kinetic energy when one electron is accelerated by a voltage diﬀerence of one Volt.
*13 In physics, when we say that a given conﬁguration of protons and neutrons in a nucleus is
 “stable,” what we really mean is that it has a lower energy than its starting conﬁguration. A
 boulder can be balanced on a hilltop indeﬁnitely, but the more stable conﬁguration is when
 the boulder is down at the base of the hill. If the nucleus goes from one conﬁguration with a
 higher energy to a more stable state with a lower energy, it must eject the energy diﬀerence
 somehow, in the form of radiation.
                           CHAPTER SEVEN




                          You Go to a Hotel



After your talk, you meet with several people in the oﬃce, answering
some detailed questions. A small group takes you out to dinner at a
nice local restaurant, and the wine with dinner is particularly good.
After dessert they walk you to your hotel, conveniently located a few
blocks away. During your presentation you were so focused on your
talk that you had forgotten about your ankle, but now the painful
twinge has returned. You are ready to get to your room and crash after
your busy day. You provide a credit card and driver’s license to the
clerk at the front desk, who then prepares the registration form for you
to sign. You glance at your fitness monitor wristband and see that,
despite spending a good portion of the day on planes, trains, and
automobiles, you have exceeded your daily steps goal. After you sign
the registration form, the clerk gives you your room key: a blank card
the same size as your credit card, in a small cardboard sleeve with
your room number written on it. You head over to the bank of
elevators. After a short wait the elevator arrives and swiftly takes you
to your ﬂoor.
                                     —
   When you take a step, you move in one or two dimensions (when traveling
in a straight line or turning a corner, respectively), or in three dimensions
(when climbing or descending a spiral staircase, for example). Every step
involves a start and stop of motion, and any change in velocity is
characterized by an “acceleration” (deﬁned as the rate at which the velocity
changes, whether increasing or decreasing). A ﬁtness monitor that tracks your
steps measures minute changes in your acceleration in three dimensions, and
when those changes cross certain preset thresholds, it records that a step has
been taken, adding it to a running tally.
   Even when walking at a steady, uniform pace, you are constantly
accelerating, as your foot presses against the ground, exerting a force that is
reciprocated by the ground, pushing back on you. From an initially stationary
position, your foot lifts up oﬀ the ground, and also moves in the direction you
wish to travel. At the step’s conclusion, your foot returns to the ground and,
again at zero velocity, you are ready to take another step. Newton’s second
law of motion is expressed mathematically as: Force is equal to the mass of an
object multiplied by the acceleration. Thus any change in motion, that is, any
acceleration, whether an increase or decrease in speed or even just a change
in direction, requires the action of a force. Your ﬁtness monitor measures
these forces associated with your steps using accelerometers that exploit the
properties of harmonic oscillators.
   At the start of this day we discussed alarm clocks and digital timers in
terms of an oscillating mass on a spring, and a pendulum bob swinging back
and forth. These oscillators had a natural frequency that was determined by
their properties (how heavy the mass, how stiﬀ the spring, the length of the
pendulum string, and so on). But the sudden, brief application of a force can
abruptly change this frequency of oscillation, as anyone who has pushed
someone on a playground swing can attest. The ﬁtness wristbands replace a
swinging pendulum or a mass on the end of a coiled spring with a tiny
cantilever. This cantilever, shaped like a minature diving board, is about 500
microns long and 50 microns thick—where an average human hair has a
diameter of approximately 100 microns—and any sudden movements are
reﬂected in its deﬂections.
   As the cantilever moves up and down in response to an external force, its
mechanical deﬂections are measured and converted into an electrical signal
through capacitor plates above and below it. The topside and underside of the
tiny diving board have a metal plate, and above and beneath the board are
other rigid metal plates, so that the board is half of two separate capacitors.
When the board moves downward, the spacing between the bottom plates
decreases, while at the same time the gap between the top plates increases.
For a ﬁxed amount of charge on the plates, the voltage across the capacitor is
very sensitive to the plate separation, and changes in the board’s position of
no more than the size of a single blood cell can be detected. Insulating
bumpers above and beneath the board prevent it from crashing into the plates
during a large jolt.
   Three such accelerometers oriented at right angles to one another monitor
your three-dimensional motion. Advances in micro-machining and
semiconductor processing have enabled the fabrication of accelerometers on a
single silicon chip, which can be incorporated directing into micro-circuits.*1
Alternatively, the displacement may be measured by having the end of the
board (or an actual mass on a spring in larger devices) be in direct contact
with the detector. In this case the greater the force, the more it presses on the
detector, which here could be a piezoelectric material or a piezoresistive
crystal (a material that changes its electrical resistance when strained).
   The output of the accelerometer is a voltage that varies in time, responding
to the sensor’s motion. How this voltage is converted into a number of steps
involves processing of the signal via computer algorithms that are, for the
most part, proprietary information of the various companies that market these
monitors. Using these protocols, the monitor will calculate the number of
steps, how many calories are burned, and your pulse rate—though this last
requires a separate measurement using light-emitting diodes.
   To record your pulse, your wrist monitor shines light from an LED onto
your wrist and uses a photodetector (a semiconductor whose resistance is
sensitive to the amount of illumination) to determine how much light is
reﬂected. Diﬀerent wavelengths of light are used, which penetrate to diﬀerent
depths beneath the skin. The light scattered back to the detector will vary
with changes in the mass under the skin, such as occur with the periodic ﬂow
in your blood vessels. Correlating the voltages from the optical detector with
those from the accelerometers helps correct for some (though not all) of the
noise in this measurement. Anything that is not a blood vessel (such as bone,
tendons, and wrist tattoos) will also scatter light and obscure the desired
information. A much better location for such pulse monitors is your ﬁngertip
or earlobe, where the skin is thin and has few obstructions, which is why
during your doctor’s visit your pulse was measured with a clamp on your
ﬁnger that employed the same physical principles as the wrist monitor. A lot
of technology is combined to convert mechanical actions into digital electrical
signals. It may be one small step for you, but it is one giant leap for science.


You arrive at your ﬂoor, a little jostled by the sudden deceleration of
the elevator car. Checking the sign on the wall, you head down the
long hallway to your room. The corridor is initially dark, with the ceiling
lights turned oﬀ, making it diﬃcult to make out the room numbers.
However, as you walk farther, a motion sensor detects your
presence and switches on the lights.
                                      —
   Most motion sensors are forms of infrared night-vision goggles, detecting
the light emitted by your body and converting this electromagnetic radiation
into an electrical signal. You emit radiation for the same reason your toaster
wire glowed red when you prepared your bagel this morning: the combo
platter of changing electric currents generating changing magnetic ﬁelds, and
changing magnetic ﬁelds inducing electric currents. The motion sensor
detects this infrared light using a detector that employs a physical
phenomenon related to that which operates in the imaging wand during an
ultrasound scan.
   First let’s consider the glowing source of infrared radiation—you. You are
made of atoms that are in constant motion. I’m referring not to blood ﬂow or
any large-scale transportation, but simply to the oscillations of the atoms
about their positions in the molecules in your cells.
   Consider an organic molecule consisting of rings of carbon atoms with
hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen atoms. Isolated from the rest of the universe,
ﬂoating in outer space, it would eventually ﬁnd itself in its lowest energy
conﬁguration, and aside from a slight tremor due to quantum mechanical
eﬀects,*2 it would be stationary. If the same molecule were placed in a pot of
hot water, the high-kinetic-energy water molecules would continually
bombard this organic molecule, transferring some of their kinetic energy to it.
Eventually, the organic molecule would have the same average energy as the
water molecules that surround it, and there would be no further net transfer of
energy. But then the organic molecule is in a higher energy state, and this
energy is spread out to all of its constituent atoms. Each atom now has a share
of kinetic energy but is constrained from leaving the molecule by the
chemical bonds holding it in place. This kinetic energy manifests as the atoms
vibrating around their positions in the molecule; and as they shake, so do their
electrons.
   The organic molecule in this scenario is a stand-in for all of the molecules
in your body, with the pot of hot water being your body. The food you eat
contains molecules with stored chemical potential energy that through a series
of chemical reactions is converted into excess kinetic energy of other
molecules, used to activate all the chemical and biological processes in your
body. Roughly half of the energy you ingest in a typical day goes toward any
large-scale activities (walking, running, making breakfast, passing through
TSA at the airport, etc.), while the other half keeps you alive, even if you
remain motionless in bed (keeping your heart beating, your lungs breathing,
and maintaining your body temperature). Temperature reﬂects the average
energy per atom of an object, and as you are reading this, the atoms in your
body are all vibrating with an average kinetic energy described by a
temperature of 98.6°F, and their vibrating electrons emit light in the infrared
region of the electromagnetic spectrum. We are all, due to our natural body
temperature, shining 100-Watt lightbulbs of infrared light.
   The motion sensor in the hotel hallway detects the infrared light you are
sending using a semiconductor device called a “pyroelectric detector,” which
converts heat (pyro) into a voltage (electric). This eﬀect is similar to
piezoelectricity, which plays an important role in maintaining the timing of
computer chips and in ultrasound scans. In the case of a piezoelectric device,
a change in stress on the crystal creates an electrical polarization of the lattice
structure that in turn generates a net electric ﬁeld (equivalent to a voltage)
across the material. In a pyroelectric material the absorption of heat causes
the atoms in the detector’s crystal structure to vibrate faster, and due to
anharmonic eﬀects of the chemical bonds and the unique arrangement of the
atoms in the solid, a distortion of the lattice occurs, creating a net electrical
polarization and hence a voltage.
   The crystal does not have to be near an open ﬂame for this to work. It will
also generate a voltage if infrared light from a heat source (such as yourself)
is close by. As most hallways and rooms are kept at a temperature of 70°F,
your skin temperature is roughly 20 degrees warmer than your surroundings,
and the energy of your infrared light is greater than the surrounding
background.*3 But what if the air-conditioning goes oﬀ during the summer,
and the hallway’s temperature rises? Most sensors use two detectors that are
wired in opposite ways. That is, a positive voltage diﬀerence that would
generate a current in one direction, created by the absorption of heat from
one detector, is connected to the negative voltage diﬀerence of the second
detector, which would create a current in the opposite direction. Thus, as the
hallway’s temperature rises, as long as the additional heat is uniform, there
will be no net signal sent out from the sensor. A person, on the other hand, is
a very localized heat source, and most sensors are part of a circuit that sends
out a voltage to turn on the lights only when there is a change in the proﬁle of
the heat signature detected, such as when you walk down the hallway.
   Such motion sensors are termed “passive,” as they detect the infrared light
only from an external source—such as your body. They use less power this
way. There are also “active” motion sensors, which send out microwaves and
look for changes in the echoing signal that returns to the detector. More
sophisticated motion sensors that are part of certain residential security
systems employ both passive infrared light detection and active microwave
broadcasting. Such systems can use simple computer chips that will not
trigger if the moving object is below a certain mass threshold, avoiding false
positives due to pets.


You stop at the door, but there is no slot for you to insert your room
key card. That’s because the clerk gave you a proximity card. You
touch the card to the circular pad underneath the door handle, but the
small LED ﬂashes red, indicating that you can’t enter the room. You
try again, and again get the red signal. A wave of frustration that you
will have to go all the way back to the lobby and have your card
reprogrammed quickly disappears when you double-check the room
number and discover that you have accidentally stopped at the wrong
door. Yours is two rooms farther down the hallway, and when you
repeat this process there, you receive a green LED. You hear the bolt
of the door’s lock being thrown back and can now enter your room.
                                       —
   The proximity card used as hotel room keys and as reloadable mass-transit
fare cards is essentially an E-ZPass system, miniaturized to the size of a
credit card.
   We’ve encountered the basic principles of the passive card-entry system
many times throughout the day, starting with the recharging of your electric
toothbrush, in which an alternating current in one coil creates an oscillating
magnetic ﬁeld, which passes through a second wire loop, inducing an
alternating current in the second coil. In the case of the hotel’s proximity
card, one coil is in the key card reader in the door-handle assembly,
connected to a power supply. Have you ever noticed that such readers, on
doors or train station turnstiles, are raised circles or large squares? The better
to house a large coil that acts like a radio antenna. The second coil is inside
the key card, running along the perimeter of the card. This coil, together with
a capacitor inside the key card, acts as a radio receiver antenna that is tuned
to only one station—the frequency being broadcast from the card reader in
the door. The broadcaster in the door sends out a low-frequency radio signal
that induces a current in the key card’s loop. This current in turn powers the
microcomputer chip also embedded within the card. This chip sends a digital
code to the coil in the card, which in turn broadcasts a message to the coil in
the door. This really is like the E-ZPass system,*4 though the receiver and
detector have to be within centimeters of each other, rather than the relatively
vast distance of many meters at a tollbooth. Upon receipt of this digital code,
the chip in the door’s key card reader sends an electrical signal to a “solenoid”
(basically an electromagnet). This electromagnet generates a force that pulls
the latch of the door open, allowing you to enter your hotel room.
   Unlike the key card, the reader in the door can recognize multiple codes,
which is convenient for housekeeping workers who need to gain access to all
of the hotel’s rooms but would prefer not to carry hundreds of individual key
cards. A timer is set for the key card’s digital code. Once your reservation is
over (or your account is depleted, in the case of proximity cards used in mass
transit systems),*5 the code on the reader is changed, and your key card will
no longer grant you access.
   These passive proximity cards must be brought very close to the card
reader, which transmits the radio wave signal to the card’s coil antenna.
Active proximity cards can broadcast their serial numbers and digital codes
over larger distances, and are used for automatic toll paying or opening
security gates. The greater energy demands for these active cards are often
provided by a thin lithium battery embedded within them, which is why these
cards are usually thicker than a business card.


You unpack your bag, which doesn’t take too long. You take a quick
shower, and are grateful for the ﬂuﬀy bathrobes the hotel provides.
Using your tablet, you access the hotel’s wi-ﬁ. You check your e-mail,
then pick up the remote control device from the bedside table and
turn on the television set mounted to the wall.
                                       —
   To make a remote control device, one needs a light-emitting diode in the
control unit that shines a beam of infrared light, and a detector in the TV set.
An infrared LED is much easier and cheaper to manufacture than one that
emits in the visible part of the spectrum. Similarly, most commonly used
semiconductors strongly absorb infrared light, which is convenient. The LED
is constructed so that it emits infrared light at one particular wavelength, and
a ﬁlter at the television set will let only that wavelength pass to the detector.
(This means you don’t have to worry about the infrared light emitted by your
body changing the channel.)
   When you press a button on the remote control, you eﬀectively close a
switch in the printed circuit underneath the set of buttons. In a printed circuit,
a thin sheet of an insulating board has various metallic lines printed on one
side. The rubber button on the controller unit has a metal disc on its
underside, and when you press the button the metal disc touches the printed
circuit board and closes a connection, and a current is sent to the infrared
LED. A set of on/oﬀ ﬂashes of infrared light, in which information for the set
is encoded, is then emitted.
   This signal is detected by a semiconductor in the television set that has a
very high resistance in the dark, but a very low resistance when it absorbs
light. In the dark, the resistance is so high that practically no current can ﬂow
through the semiconductor; it is as if a switch is left open. When infrared
light shines on the detector in the television set, electrons are promoted from
the lower-energy ﬁlled band to the higher-energy empty band. Now a current
can ﬂow—like a switch has been closed, completing the circuit. The on and
oﬀ ﬂashes eﬀectively open and close the switch in the television, and the on
and oﬀ currents are the information for the computer chip in the set. The
chip interprets the message encoded in the current, and responds by sending
the requested signal to other parts of the television circuit, changing the
channel or altering the volume.
   A striking consequence of quantum mechanics is the band structure of
solids—as in the analogy of a ﬁlled lower-energy orchestra and empty higher-
energy balcony. Diﬀerent elements or molecules will have diﬀerent energy
spacings. Quantum mechanics indicates that an atom’s electrons can have only
very speciﬁc values of energy, with a gap in energy between the last allowed
energy state that has electrons and the ﬁrst possible energy value that is
unoccupied. When many atoms are brought together, these energy states
broaden into bands. In semiconductors and insulators the lower-energy band
is full and the ﬁrst upper-energy band is empty, while in metals the lower-
energy band is only partially ﬁlled (which is why the electrons in metals can
carry current even without moving into the balcony states). Any light that
does not have enough energy to bridge the gap between the orchestra and the
balcony cannot be absorbed, no matter how bright, and passes through the
material as if it were not there, a direct manifestation of the quantum nature
of matter.
   Infrared light is associated with heat, because it is easily absorbed and
converted to kinetic energy by most molecules. In fact, most of what we know
about molecules is thanks to the quantum mechanical nature of how they
absorb infrared light. The quantum partition of allowed energy states into
occupied and unoccupied bands in solids exists within molecules as well.
Think of a very simple molecule, such as two hydrogen atoms bonded
together to form a hydrogen molecule (H2). The H2 molecule can move from
one place to another, and quantum mechanics places no constraints on its
energy because it is in free space. But there are other ways it can move. It can
vibrate back and forth along a line connecting the two hydrogen atoms, and
the energy of this vibration can take on only speciﬁc values. In addition, it can
rotate about an axis passing through the midpoint between the hydrogen
atoms, and here again, only certain energies of rotation are possible. These
energy spacings for rotations and vibrations are usually in the infrared (or
lower energy) portion of the spectrum, and the molecule will absorb infrared
light only if it has exactly the right energy to induce one of these transitions.
Diﬀerent molecules will have diﬀerent rotation-vibration energy spacings, and
in fact each molecule has a unique “infrared spectrum ﬁngerprint.” One of the
most powerful tools physical chemists and forensic scientists have for
determining the chemical composition of an unknown object is to measure its
infrared spectrum and compare it with that of known molecules.
   The silicon dioxide molecules in window glass can also vibrate around their
locations in the solid, and these vibrations lead to absorption of infrared light.
Ultraviolet light, with energy greater than the violet end of the visible light
spectrum, will induce transitions between the orchestra band and the balcony
band; the glass will absorb it. So, we can look through glass because it
transmits visible light, and in fact, visible light is the only light that glass will
pass.*6


The set comes to life, and as you change channels, searching for the
local news, you marvel at the bright, high-contrast image. You are
even more impressed when you take a closer look at the flat panel
television set and notice how remarkably thin it is. Whereas the LCD
television set you have at home is a few inches thick, this set seems
to be no more than an inch from front to back. You notice an
embossed label on the front of the casing that lists this set as an
OLED.
                                         —
   The transition from bulky cathode-ray tube television sets to ﬂat panel
televisions was enabled, in part, by the replacement of vacuum tubes by solid-
state transistors. The newer forms of ﬂat panel televisions make a similar,
radical change in technology, where the transistor, light source, and liquid
crystal display (LCD) are replaced by an ultra-thin light-emitting diode
composed of organic molecules. These “organic light-emitting diodes”
(OLEDs) can be painted onto surfaces using silk-screening techniques; they
use much less power and have faster display times than LCD-based
televisions.
   To make an LCD television, as in the LCD projector described earlier, we
need a light source (either a cold-cathode ﬂuorescent lamp or a
semiconductor-based light-emitting diode), a large array of liquid crystal
pixels, and a thin-ﬁlm transistor behind each pixel to process the signal sent
from the cable or antenna and determine whether an electric ﬁeld should be
applied across the glass slides or not. The OLED display does all of the above
with a single light-emitting diode that can be ten times thinner than the LCD
system.
   As described before, in an ordinary light-emitting diode, diﬀerent chemical
impurities are added to semiconductors that either supply extra electrons to
the balcony or remove electrons from the ﬁlled orchestra, in essence adding
holes to the lower band. Then these two materials are combined on top of
each other. An electrical current is pushed through the two semiconductor
layers, electrons from one side and holes on the other, and where they meet at
the interface between the two layers, the electrons in the balcony drop down
into the holes in the orchestra, emitting a photon of light when they do. An
OLED works in exactly the same way, except that one organic molecule is
used for the side that carries the electrons and a diﬀerent molecule is used for
the one that transports the holes. These two diﬀerent molecules are separated
by another layer, of a third organic molecule, that serves as the region where
the electrons and holes recombine, emitting light. By changing the chemical
composition of this third molecule, one can vary the color of light that is
emitted, and OLEDs can shine in red, green, or blue light—or, when these
primary colors are combined, white light.
   In an LCD television display, depending on the electric ﬁeld across the
glass plates, the liquid crystal will either block or transmit the illumination
from the light source, which is always on. A color ﬁlter then shifts the light to
red, green, or blue, and when they are combined a color image can be
displayed. In an OLED-based television these elements (aside from the thin-
ﬁlm, amorphous silicon transistor)*7 are replaced by the organic-molecule
light-emitting diode. No crystalline semiconductor LED as a light source is
needed, as the OLED emits its own light. No color ﬁlters are needed, as
diﬀerent OLEDs can be used for the three basic colors.*8 No bulky glass
slides and liquid crystal are needed to block the light—when a pixel should be
dark, the current is turned oﬀ through the OLED. In this way the black pixels
on an OLED display are true blacks, providing much sharper contrast in the
resulting image.
   The greater the current passing through the OLED, the more photons are
emitted and the brighter the image. The OLEDs require much less energy to
run than the light-emitting diode and liquid crystal display combination,
making these types of display very attractive for smartphones, tablets, and
wrist ﬁtness monitors relying on battery power. One can turn the OLED on
and oﬀ hundreds of times faster than one can twist and untwist the liquid
crystal pixel, so OLED displays avoid the motion blurring that sometimes
plagues LCD sets. The OLED pixel is thinner than the diameter of a single
red blood cell, while the comparable functionality for an LCD pixel requires a
few millimeters of thickness.
   So why don’t all ﬂat panel television sets use OLED displays? They’re still
much more expensive to manufacture than LCD sets. In addition, the
molecules used in the blue light OLED tend to degrade over time, forcing
cumbersome workarounds until better molecules can be found. Finally, the
organic molecules in the OLEDs don’t react well with water—admittedly
more of a concern for smartphone displays than wall-mounted televisions.
Still, a large advantage of using organic molecules is that you can spread them
over vast areas using either ink-jet printing techniques or silk screening, as
for a T-shirt. As no heavy and inﬂexible glass sheets are required to conﬁne a
liquid crystal layer, the OLED displays can be printed onto plastic sheets that
can be rolled up and stored in your back pocket. Or one could print the
display directly onto clothing or other nontraditional surfaces. As research in
this and other areas progresses, what once was considered science ﬁction will
become commonplace.
After watching the news for a while, you settle into bed and, changing
the channel, ﬁnd a comforting old movie. It’s one of your favorites, the
1985 ﬁlm Back to the Future. You catch the end of the ﬁlm, where
Marty and his girlfriend, Jennifer, are surprised when the time-traveling
DeLorean appears in a ﬂash of light in front of them. Doc Brown exits
the vehicle, wearing “future clothes.” Arguing that Marty and Jennifer
must accompany him back to 2015, he refuels his machine using
organic and inorganic matter (that is, garbage) that he places inside
the “Mr. Fusion” reactor strapped to the hood of his car. With Marty
and Jennifer in the car, and Doc at the wheel, Marty points out that
they need to back up, as they don’t have enough road ahead of them
to get up to a speed of 88 miles per hour (the speed at which the car’s
time-travel mechanism will be activated). Putting on “future
sunglasses” (that no one in 2015 has ever worn), Doc replies, as the
DeLorean transforms into a flying car: “Roads? Where we’re going
we won’t need roads.”
                                       —
   There are only two reasons why, well into the twenty-ﬁrst century, we still
don’t have ﬂying cars: physics and chemistry.*9
   The physics constraint comes from the principle of conservation of energy.
A car is a heavy object, and to lift it even a few feet oﬀ the ground means
raising its potential energy by 15,000 Joules. For comparison, a 100-mile-
per-hour fastball has a kinetic energy of 140 Joules. To lift the vehicle so that
one truly is independent of any preexisting roads or highways would easily
call for over one hundred times more energy. And this is just to lift the car
and park it on a cliﬀ.
   To keep it elevated while driving, you have to continually exert a downward
force, so that, thanks to Newton’s third law of motion (forces come in pairs),
the car experiences an upward force, counteracting the downward pull of
gravity. For a DeLorean, this would require a constant downward force of
about 2,800 pounds, exerted all the time. As soon as you stop providing this
downward force, gravity will accelerate you back to Earth. We’ve discussed
how one would generate this much force before—using an internal
combustion jet engine. A single jet engine can easily provide suﬃcient thrust
to support an automobile, and most imagined ﬂying cars have four such
engines, where the tires would normally be located. These levitating vehicles
would presumably have much smaller jet engines than their larger cousins
employed on modern aircraft, but let us assume that the reduced thrust of
each single engine is compensated by the fact that there are four of them on
our ﬂying car. Whenever these sorts of ﬂying cars appear in Hollywood
movies, they are typically portrayed as quieter than conventional internal-
combustion-engine automobiles—but in reality, if you had jet engines sitting
at the four corners of your vehicle, the noise would serve as a serious
distraction to your ﬂying and tax the capabilities of the best noise-canceling
headphones. Nor would it be too pleasant for any pedestrians standing
underneath the exhaust of these jet engines.
   But there is another limitation, derived from chemistry, that makes ﬂying
cars impractical. As just mentioned, it takes a considerable amount of energy
to keep a car levitated in the air, and the vehicle needs to carry the source of
this energy with it.*10 Here, as for conventional automobiles, the important
issue is energy density—how much stored chemical potential energy can you
carry per pound of fuel?
   In Back to the Future the ﬂying car converts the organic waste into energy
through a “Mr. Fusion” device. Organic matter, such as banana peels and
beer, is mostly water, and a certain number of the hydrogen atoms in water
molecules contain an extra neutron in their nucleus, bound through the Strong
Force, which is termed “deuterium.” H2O molecules with deuterium
replacing the hydrogen are called “heavy water.” If two deuterium nuclei are
fused into a single larger nucleus of two protons and two neutrons, we would
then have a helium nucleus. The helium nucleus has a mass slightly less than
two deuterium nuclei, and the change in mass is converted into a large
amount of energy (through E = mc2) in this fusion process. This nuclear
fusion occurs in the heart of the sun and is the source of all of its energy (re-
created on Earth in the form of the hydrogen bomb). If we could achieve the
same eﬀect in a small device that could ﬁt on a kitchen counter, we truly
would be in the World of Tomorrow, and ﬂying cars would be the least of the
changes to our lives.
   It’s not just how much energy your ﬂying car can carry in its fuel supply,
but how fast the energy can be deployed. Power is not the same as energy, but
rather is a measure of the speed or rate of energy conversion or use.
   Being able to rapidly provide energy is important if you are going to have a
ﬂying car. Unlike airplanes that soar at altitudes of over 30,000 feet, where
the thin air reduces the eﬀect of air drag, a ﬂying car will need to expend
considerable energy pushing the air out of its way, in addition to providing a
vertical force to counterbalance the downward pull of gravity, and have some
left over to actually ﬂy the vehicle to its destination. The ideal power supply
for a ﬂying car would have a high energy-per-pound combined with the ease
of storage of a lightweight lithium battery. Recent research on a device that
has appeared time and again throughout your day (and in this book) may oﬀer
a breakthrough on energy storage and power delivery. It is a simple construct
that is the foundation of much of the technology you encounter on a daily
basis: the capacitor.
                                    FIGURE 7


   In a lithium battery the ions that provide the electrical energy are generated
via chemical reactions, involving the motion of atoms. As small as a lithium
ion is, it weighs 12,000 times more than a single electron. Instead of having
the stored electrical charges be associated with ions, it would be much more
eﬃcient if we got rid of the heavy nuclei and just used lightweight electrons
to store electrical energy. This is exactly what a capacitor does, with the
added beneﬁt that when you draw a current from the charges stored on a
capacitor, the electrical signal moves at nearly the speed of light, much faster
than the rate of the chemical reactions that charge up the lithium battery’s
electrodes. So the power (that is, the rate of energy provided) delivered by a
capacitor is very high. Where capacitors fall short is in the total amount of
energy they can store. Up until recently, the best energy densities (Joules per
kilogram) one could achieve in a capacitor were over 1,000 times lower than
in the best lithium-ion batteries. In other words, even though they could
discharge or recharge much faster than a battery, they were not viable as
power supplies for ﬂying cars (or even regular ones, for that matter).
   Newer capacitors under development may change all that, dramatically
increasing the amount of electrical energy they can hold. In these capacitors,
the plates are coated with a very thin (about a tenth of a millimeter) layer of
carbon. Using chemical tricks, this carbon is roughened up so that instead of
a smooth, uniform surface it looks like the interior of an English muﬃn, with
many nooks and crannies. Such carbon is termed “activated”; any process that
proceeds on the material’s surface, such as storing a charge, will be
dramatically improved by having many more places on the surface with which
to react. The eﬀective surface area of capacitors with activated carbon is
nearly 10,000 to 100,000 times larger than that of the smooth metal plate,
and the stored charge density correspondingly increases. In addition, the
space between the activated carbon-coated metal plates is ﬁlled with a ﬂuid,
called an “electrolyte,” that contains both positively and negatively charged
ions. By piling up ionic charges right next to the plates, the electrolyte reduces
the eﬀective separation of the charged plates to roughly the length of an atom,
greatly increasing the electric ﬁeld between the ion layer and the electron
layer. Such devices can theoretically store over ten million times more
electrical energy than a comparably sized normal capacitor, and are termed
“ultra-capacitors,” or “super-capacitors.”
   While the basic physics of super-capacitors has been known since the
1960s and ’70s, advances in materials science in the 1990s have brought their
power densities close to the levels required for use in cars (the Earthbound
versions). Present super-capacitors have an energy density roughly 5 percent
of a lithium-ion battery’s and can deliver that energy in under a second, for a
power density, or rate of energy delivered per mass, nearly ten times greater
than for a lithium-ion battery. A super-capacitor could recharge in seconds
(limited by ion diﬀusion over very short distances), compared to an hour for a
conventional lithium battery. Because there are no chemical reactions to take
place in the capacitor, there is no degradation of the terminals, and the
lifetime of such a charge-storage device would exceed the life of the car or
truck that it powered. While they aren’t ready to serve as the main source of
power for transportation, super-capacitors are already being used in speciﬁc
situations where a large burst of power is called for—in some buses and
trucks needing an acceleration boost when climbing a hill, or for the rapid
opening of emergency exit doors on jetliners. And while it is not very likely,
perhaps one day enough energy could be stored in these devices that we will
indeed achieve freedom from the tyranny of roads.
                                     —
   Throughout your day, you’ve relied on physics—very old and very new.
The principle of conservation of energy governs all aspects of our lives.
Nearly as important have been the basics of electromagnetism, where
electrical currents create magnetic ﬁelds, and changing magnetic ﬁelds induce
electrical currents. The study of the properties of matter and light on the
atomic scale led to the development of quantum mechanics, which in turn
enabled powerful applications of chemistry and solid-state physics. These
same basic concepts have been employed again and again throughout the day,
helping make it anything but ordinary.


You turn oﬀ the OLED ﬂat panel television using the remote control.
Tapping the touch screen on the LCD of your smartphone, you check
that the alarm clock is set to wake you tomorrow morning so that you
have enough time to catch your return ﬂight home. For the alarm you
select a tune stored in the phone’s computer memory, a snippet from
a song you downloaded from the Cloud. Still thinking about the end of
the movie, you drift oﬀ to sleep, grateful for the marvels of science,
wondering if you’ll ever get your ﬂying car.
*1 Such devices are called MEMS—for “micro-electrical mechanical systems.”
*2 Even at the absolute zero of temperature there is some jittering of the atoms, called “zero-
 point motion,” that is a consequence of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. This is an
 interesting phenomenon, but it has nothing to do with the operation of motion sensors, so
 forget I brought it up.
*3 Night-vision goggles operate on the same principle—you are a bright source of infrared
 light compared to your environment, especially at night when the average temperature
 drops without sunlight exposure, and photoconducting semiconductors convert this infrared
 light into a voltage.
*4 Some systems also share a feature with your remote entry system for your car, in that the
 digital code sent by the card is generated by an algorithm that updates the code when the
 card is used. This prevents a key card from the room’s previous occupants from working
 once their reservation is over.
*5 Many cities still encode information on their fare cards via a magnetic stripe, which must
 be swiped to be read, employing the same physics as a credit card reader.
*6 Note that carbon sits right above silicon in the Periodic Table, and carbon dioxide is
 chemically similar to silicon dioxide, and will also let visible light pass unmolested but
 absorb infrared light. This is why carbon dioxide is termed a “greenhouse gas.” Visible light
 during the day strikes the surface of the Earth, warming it. At night, the planet cools down
 by emitting infrared light. But if the light is absorbed by carbon dioxide (and other gases)
 in the atmosphere, some of the energy can then be re-radiated back to the Earth’s surface,
 keeping it warm even when the sun is not out.
*7 Amorphous semiconductors are used, as the array of transistors needs to cover a large
 area for big-screen ﬂat panel televisions.
*8 For technical and ﬁnancial reasons, some OLED displays combine red, green, and blue
 OLEDs to generate white light, which is then passed through a ﬁlter to create either a red,
 green, blue, or white pixel. There’s a beneﬁt in the manufacturing process to doing it this
 way, but one can just as easily use the red, green, and blue OLEDs directly.
*9 I am considering here the ﬂying cars that have vertical lift-oﬀ and landing capabilities, and
 not ones with retractable wings that are essentially small planes. Versions of this latter
 “ﬂying car” do indeed exist, but they are not the vehicles that have long been promised by
 science ﬁction ﬁlms and comic books.
*10 In the Back to the Future ﬁlms, this energy constraint is acknowledged, and in fact much
 of the plot revolves around obtaining energy (in the form of plutonium or lightning bolts) to
 operate the time machine.
                           AKNOWLEDGMENTS




The idea of a book explaining the basic physics underlying the technology we
employ on a daily basis began with a suggestion from Roger Scholl, my ﬁrst
editor at Crown. The talented Domenica Alioto then piloted the resulting
unwieldly manuscript, rightly calling for serious pruning. It was Domenica
who proposed recasting the book to follow someone through a hypothetical
day; she coined the term “narrative physics” to describe the book’s structure.
When Domenica was not available, Claire Potter seamlessly took over the
editing reins and helped bring the book to completion. I am deeply grateful
for all three editors, along with the thoughtful contributions of the copy
editor, Lawrence Krauser, though I confess to being concerned as to what it
implies about my writing that it would require the attention of so many
talented and dedicated personnel. I also must thank my agent, Jay Mandel,
who initiated the entire venture and has been tremendously supportive
throughout this long process.
      One of the pleasures of writing this book has been to observe myself as
I carried out various tasks the eponymous “you” would perform, seeing the
technology that was in plain sight that I nevertheless rarely noticed. I then had
an opportunity to explore how these devices functioned, deepening my
appreciation. Often my ﬁrst step when researching many of the devices
discussed here was to take down from my bookshelf Professor Louis
Bloomﬁeld’s excellent How Everything Works (John Wiley & Sons, 2008),
closely followed by visiting the websites www.howstuﬀworks.com and
www.explainthatstuﬀ.com. I also greatly beneﬁted from discussions with my
colleagues, particularly John Broadhurst, Paul Crowell, Michel Janssen, and
Chris Kim. Brian Skinner and C. C. Huang provided guidance on the text for
several of the devices, and E. Dan Dahlberg, Aaron Wynveen, Doug Kohrs,
and Carolyn Kohrs graciously read the entire manuscript in various stages of
its existence. Their input greatly improved the ﬁnal text, though of course any
errors or confusing points remain my responsibility.
      And I owe a debt that cannot ever be paid to my wife and family. My
wife, Therese, has been encouraging, supportive, and patient. The book
simply could not have been written without her. Her inspiration and feedback
throughout the writing process were essential, and I am thankful every day for
her love. Honey, let’s take that walk now.
NOTES
CHAPTER ONE: YOU BEGIN YOUR DAY
A pendulum is a very simple device: Paul A. Tipler and Gene Mosca, Physics for Scientists
      and Engineers, 6th ed. (W. H. Freeman, 2007), 465–74.
Your electric company rotates coils of wire: Roger A. Hinrichs and Merlin Kleinbach,
      Energy: Its Use and the Environment, 3rd ed. (Brooks/Cole, 2002), 358–67.
specially designed chips that shift the frequency: Paul Horowitz and Winﬁeld Hill, The
      Art of Electronics, 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 1989), 885–86.
keeping time in a device: Dominique Flechon, The Mastery of Time: A History of
      Timekeeping, from the Sundial to the Wristwatch: Discoveries, Inventions, and Advances
      in Master Watchmaking (Flammarion, 2012).
predates the existence of electrical power: Streets were ﬁrst electriﬁed in 1882, while the
      Seth Thomas Cook Company patented a small mechanical alarm clock in 1876.
      Maggie Koerth-Baker, Before the Lights Go Out: Conquering the Energy Crisis Before It
      Conquers Us (John Wiley & Sons, 2012), 10.
material is called piezoelectric: Bernard Jaﬀe, Piezoelectric Ceramics (Academic Press,
      1971); Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 5th ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 2008),
      300.
the “musical conductor”: Alvis J. Evans, Basic Digital Electronics (Master Publishing,
      1996), 24–26.
switch in less than a nanosecond: Laptop and desktop computers have CPUs that switch
      much faster than those in smartphones, but they also require more energy. One of the
      imperatives of smartphone engineering is to use as little energy as possible, to prolong
      battery life.
convert electrical voltages into mechanical vibrations: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything
      Works, 426.
The natural frequencies of wood: Bruno L. Giordano and Stephen McAdams, “Sound
      Source Mechanics and Musical Timbre Perception: Evidence from Previous Studies,”
      Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 121, 2384 (2007); D. Murray Campbell,
      “Evaluating Musical Instruments,” Physics Today 67 (April 2014): 35–40.
is called a “transformer”: Tipler and Mosca, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, 1004–
      1006.
Toaster wire is usually composed: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 225.
sugars and starches undergo a chemical reaction: Joseph J. Provost, Keri L. Colabroy,
      Brenda S. Kelley, and Mark A. Wallert, The Science of Cooking: Understanding the
      Biology and Chemistry Behind Food and Cooking (John Wiley & Sons, 2016), 198–217.
subverts the standard paradigm: See, for example, Donald S. L. Cardwell, From Watt to
      Clausius: The Rise of Thermodynamics in the Early Industrial Age (Cornell University
      Press, 1971).
a refrigerator is an engine run backward: Mark W. Zemansky, Heat and
      Thermodynamics, 5th ed. (McGraw-Hill, 1968), 179–85. A description of evaporation
      cooling is presented in James Kakalios, The Physics of Superheroes: Spectacular Second
      Edition (Gotham Books, 2009), 170–71.
Refrigerators once used Freon: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 261.
In 2016, 170 nations: Coral Davenport, “Nations, Fighting Powerful Refrigerant That
      Warms Planet, Reach Landmark Deal,” New York Times, October 15, 2016.
CHAPTER TWO: YOU DRIVE INTO THE CITY
A hybrid car uses both: Chuck Edmondson, Fast Car Physics (Johns Hopkins University
     Press, 2011), 194–200.
A typical battery employs ions: Ibid., 187–91.
There are four steps in a combustion cycle: Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 5th
     ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 2008), 260–64.
A gasoline molecule consists: Gordon J. Aubrect, Energy: Physical, Environmental and
     Social Impact, 3rd ed. (Pearson Prentice Hall, 2006), 217–18.
In some hybrids: Edmondson, Fast Car Physics, 196–98.
Your GPS device communicates with satellites: See, for example, Patrap Misra and Per
     Enge, Global Positioning System: Signals, Measurements and Performance, rev. 2nd ed.
     (Ganga-Jumana, 2010).
Albert Einstein’s general theory of relativity: There are many excellent popular science
     descriptions of general relativity, particularly Kip S. Thorne, Black Holes and Time
     Warps: Einstein’s Outrageous Legacy (W. H. Norton & Co., 1995); and Pedro G.
     Ferreira, The Perfect Theory: A Century of Geniuses and the Battle Over General
     Relativity (Houghton Miﬄin Harcourt, 2014).
To paraphrase theoretical physicist John Archibald Wheeler: Wheeler, a collaborator
     with Einstein, coined the terms “black hole” and “wormhole.” In his book Geons, Black
     Holes and Quantum Foam (W. W. Norton & Co., 2000), 235, coauthored with Kenneth
     William Ford, he wrote: “Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime
     how to curve.”
There are two eﬀects stemming: Chad Orzel, How to Teach Relativity to Your Dog (Basic
     Books, 2012), 220–21.
The E-ZPass system: See “How E-ZPass Works” on HowStuﬀWorks website,
     http://auto.howstuﬀworks.com/e-zpass.htm.
How does a radio work?: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 428–35.
As the density of cars: Books that describe models of traﬃc ﬂow for a general readership
     include Mitchel Resnick, Turtles, Termites and Traﬃc Jams: Explorations in Massively
     Parallel Microworlds (MIT Press, 1994); and Tom Vanderbilt, Traﬃc: Why We Drive
     the Way We Do (and What It Says About Us) (Knopf, 2008). Those looking for more
     mathematical discussions should start with Dirk Helbing, “Traﬃc and Related Self-
     Driven Many-Particle Systems,” Reviews of Modern Physics 73, 1067 (2001), and
     references therein.
an intrinsic instability of the traﬃc itself: These intrinsic jams can cost us real money—a
     2011 “Urban Mobility Report” from the Texas Transportation Institute estimated the
     economic impact of traﬃc jams on the U.S. economy to be roughly $100 billion per
     year, equivalent to $750 per commuter.
described as a collective phenomenon: B. S. Kerner and P. Konhauser, “Cluster Eﬀect in
     Initially Homogeneous Traﬃc Flow,” Physical Review E 48, 2335 (1993); Kai Nagel
     and Maya Paczuski, “Emergent Traﬃc Jams,” Physical Review E 51, 2909 (1995); H.
     Y. Lee, H.-W. Lee, and D. Kim, “Origin of Synchronized Traﬃc Flow on Highways
     and Its Dynamic Phase Transition,” Physical Review Letters 81, 1130 (1998); B. S.
     Kerner, “Experimental Features of Self-Organization in Traﬃc Flow,” Physical Review
     Letters 81, 3797 (1998).
Two factors play a key role: Robert E. Chandler, Robert Herman, and Elliott W. Montroll,
     “Traﬃc Dynamics: Studies in Car Following,” Operations Research 6, 163 (1958).
An analogous situation: While there is considerable overlap between the dynamics of
     granular media and traﬃc ﬂow (see, for example, the proceedings of the International
     Workshop on Traﬃc and Granular Flow, held every two years for the past two
     decades), the equations describing a sandpile’s instability diﬀer from those modeling
     the spontaneous formation of traﬃc jams.
one person at the front edge: Takashi Nagatani, “Traﬃc Jams Induced by Fluctuation of a
     Leading Car,” Physical Review E 61, 3534 (2000).
drive at a steady, uniform speed: Junfang Tian, Rui Jiang, Geng Li, Martin Treiber, Bin
     Jia, and Chenqiang Zhu, “Improved 2D Intelligent Driver Model in the Framework of
     Three-Phase Traﬃc Theory Simulating Synchronized and Concave Growth Patterns of
     Traﬃc Oscillations,” Transportation Research Part F: Traﬃc Psychology and Behavior
     41, 55 (2016).
“radar” is an acronym: See, for example, J. C. Toomay and Paul J. Hannen, Radar
     Principles for the Non-Specialist, 3rd ed. (SciTech Publishing, 2004).
traced back to the proximity fuse: Barry Parker, The Physics of War: From Arrows to
     Atoms (Prometheus Books, 2014), 241–42.
Your remote entry system: Mark Fischetti, “Open Sesame,” Scientiﬁc American, January
     2005.
Your radio tuner: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 430.
Couldn’t someone with a receiver: Matt Lake, “How It Works; Remote Keyless Entry:
     Staying a Step Ahead of Car Thieves,” New York Times, June 7, 2001.
CHAPTER THREE: YOU GO TO THE DOCTOR
An elevator is essentially a pulley: David Macaulay, The Way Things Work (Houghton
      Miﬄin Company, 1988), 65.
Speed is mostly dependent on the motor: Lauren Anderson, “How It Works: World’s
      Fastest Elevator,” Popular Science, April 2012.
The main rule for elevator safety: Ibid.
“governor” in the rotating pulley: Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 5th ed. (John
      Wiley & Sons, 2008), 123.
The website address you type: Andrew Blum, Tubes: A Journey to the Center of the Internet
      (HarperCollins, 2012), 29–30, 49–55.
The diﬀerence between analog and digital: Barry M. Lunt, Marvels of Modern Electronics:
      A Survey (Dover, 2013), 173–75.
A more reliable way to transmit information: See, for example, John R. Pierce, An
      Introduction to Information Theory: Symbols, Signals and Noise, 2nd rev. ed. (Dover,
      1980).
a sequence of closely spaced dots: See, for example, Jiun-Haw Lee, David N. Liu, and
      Shin-Tson Wu, Introduction to Flat Panel Displays (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
The old-school glass thermometers: Mark W. Zemansky, Heat and Thermodynamics, 5th
      ed. (McGraw-Hill, 1968), 9–14.
Any system can be used as a thermometer: Guy K. White, Experimental Techniques in
      Low-Temperature Physics, 3rd ed. (Oxford Science Publications, 1979), 83–122.
When two dissimilar metals: D. K. C. MacDonald, Thermoelecticity: An Introduction to the
      Principles (Dover Books, 2006), 12–15; White, Experimental Techniques in Low-
      Temperature Physics, 117–22. See James Kakalios, The Amazing Story of Quantum
      Mechanics (Gotham, 2010), 256, for a discussion of thermocouples.
In an x-ray tube: Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms,
      Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 1985), 40–43.
As x-rays move into a solid: See, for example, William H. Zachariasen, Theory of X-Ray
      Diﬀraction in Crystals (Dover, 1967).
“computer-aided tomography”: Jerrold T. Bushberg, J. Anthony Seibert, Edwin M.
      Leidholdt Jr., and John M. Boone, The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging, 3rd ed.
      (LLW, 2011), 312–75.
In ultrasound imaging: See, for example, Marveen Craig, Essentials of Sonography and
      Patient Care, 3rd ed. (Saunders, 2012); and James A. Zagzebski, Essentials of
      Ultrasound Physics (Mosby, 1996).
each have a small, built-in magnetic ﬁeld: Eisberg and Resnick, Quantum Physics of
      Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 434–37.
ﬁrst recognized by Albert Einstein back in 1905: Barry Parker, Quantum Legacy: The
      Discovery That Changed Our Universe (Prometheus Books, 2002), 46–50.
The dominant MRI signal: See, for example, Dominik Weishaupt, Victor D. Koechli, and
      Borut Marincek, How Does MRI Work? An Introduction to the Physics and Function of
      Magnetic Resonance Imaging (Springer, 2008). A description of the physics behind
      magnetic resonance imaging is in Kakalios, The Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics,
      227–33.
One recent study: Simon Walker-Samuel et al., “In Vivo Imaging of Glucose Uptake and
      Metabolism in Tumors,” Nature Medicine 19, 1067 (2013).
CHAPTER FOUR: YOU GO TO THE AIRPORT
antique technology of carbon paper: See “Carbon Paper” on the How Products Are Made
      website, http://www.madehow.com/Volume-1/Carbon-Paper.html#ixzz4IkE9h9fE; and
      Kevin Laurence, “The Exciting History of Carbon Paper!,”
      http://www.kevinlaurence.net/essays/cc.php.
magnetic stripe on your credit card: Robert C. O’Handley, Modern Magnetic Materials:
      Principles and Applications (John Wiley & Sons, 2000), 674–77; Barry M. Lunt,
      Marvels of Modern Electronics: A Survey (Dover, 2013), 150–52; Thomas Norman,
      Electronic Access Control (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2011), 53–54.
Since binary information is the foundation: T. R. Reid, The Chip: How Two Americans
      Invented the Microchip and Launched a Revolution (Simon & Schuster, 1985), 121–27.
      For a primer on how to use binary to count to 31 using the ﬁngers of one hand, see The
      Unbeatable Squirrel Girl, no. 11, written by Ryan North and drawn by Jacob Chabot
      and Erica Henderson (Marvel Comics, October 2016).
using a “read head”: Jagadeesh S. Moodera, Guo-Xing Miao, and Tiﬀany S. Santos,
      “Frontiers in Spin-Polarized Tunneling,” Physics Today, April 2010.
often termed an RFID: Roy Want, “RFID—A Key to Automating Everything,” Scientiﬁc
      American, August 2008.
“resistive” sensing: Geoﬀ Walker, “A Review of Technologies for Sensing Location on the
      Surface of a Display,” Journal of the Society for Information Display 20, 413 (2012).
device called a “capacitor”: Paul A. Tipler and Gene Mosca, Physics for Scientists and
      Engineers, 6th ed. (W. H. Freeman, 2007), 802–806.
When the charge stored on one: Walker, “A Review of Technologies.”
a special alloy, indium tin oxide: H. J. J. van Boort and R. Groth, “Low Pressure Sodium
      Lamps with Indium Oxide Filter,” Phillips Technical Review 29, 17 (1968); Mamoru
      Mizuhashi, “Electrical Properties of Vacuum-Deposited Indium Oxide and Indium Tin
      Oxide Films,” Thin Solid Films 70, 91 (1980).
Some touch screens use light: Stuart F. Brown, “Hands-On Computing,” Scientiﬁc
      American, July 2008.
“total internal reﬂection”: Lunt, Marvels of Modern Electronics: A Survey, 202–207.
the basis of ﬁber-optic cable: In a ﬁber-optic cable, the light travels down a cylindrical core
      that is surrounded by an outer shell (called the “cladding”) of another material with a
      lower index of refraction. If these indexes are chosen carefully, then the light will be
      reﬂected at the core/cladding interface, regardless of the angle it makes with the
      surface. Light that travels in a straight-line beam, as from a laser, will bounce oﬀ the
      cladding and continue its propagation down the core ﬁber, no matter how many twists
      or turns the cable makes. See Ben G. Streetman and Sanjay Banerjee, Solid State
      Electronic Devices, 5th ed. (Prentice Hall, 2000), 392–94.
handheld metal detectors: Marshall Brain, MORE How Stuﬀ Works (John Wiley & Sons,
      2002), 291–93.
walk-through detectors: David Macaulay, The Way Things Work (Houghton Miﬄin
      Company, 1988), 323.
scanners at airports use “millimeter waves”: R. Appleby, “Passive Millimetre-Wave
      Imaging and How It Diﬀers from Terahertz Imaging,” Philosophical Transactions of the
      Royal Society of London A 362, 379 (2004).
electromagnetic wave with a wavelength: Paul A. Tipler and Gene Mosca, Physics for
      Scientists and Engineers vol. 1, 6th ed. (W. H. Freeman, 2007), 1041.
insulators or semiconductors as an old-style movie theater: James Kakalios, The
      Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics (Gotham, 2010), 175–78.
In some detectors: John Rowlands and Safa Kasap, “Amorphous Semiconductors Usher in
      Digital X-Ray Imaging,” Physics Today, November 1997; Yoshihiro Izumi and
      Yasukuni Yamane, “Solid-State X-Ray Imagers,” MRS Bulletin, November 2002;
      Martin Niki, “Scintillation Detectors for X-rays,” Measurement Science and Technology
      17, R37 (2006).
absorption of either x-ray or visible-light: Rowlands and Kasap, “Amorphous
      Semiconductors Usher in Digital X-Ray Imaging.”
A molecule of trinitrotoluene: See, for example, G. A. Eiceman, Z. Karpas, and Herbert H.
      Hill Jr., Ion Mobility Spectrometry, 3rd ed. (CRC Press, 2016).
“ion mobility spectroscopy”: Abu B. Kanu, Prabha Dwivedi, Maggie Tam, Laura Matz, and
      Herbert H. Hill Jr., “Ion Mobility-Mass Spectrometry,” Journal of Mass Spectrometry
      43, 1 (2008).
CHAPTER FIVE: YOU TAKE A FLIGHT
Lithium, like its alkaline cousins: Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 5th ed. (John
      Wiley & Sons, 2008), 632–45; and see Seth Fletcher, Bottled Lightning: Superbatteries,
      Electric Cars and the New Lithium Economy (Hill and Wang, 2011).
As conventional alkaline batteries age: Isidor Buchmann, Batteries in a Portable World: A
      Handbook on Rechargeable Batteries for Non-Engineers, 4th ed. (Cadex Electronics,
      2016); Thomas Reddy, Linden’s Handbook of Batteries, 4th ed. (McGraw-Hill
      Education, 2010).
Years ago, batteries in automobiles: Henry Schlesinger, The Battery: How Portable Power
      Sparked a Technological Revolution (Smithsonian Books, 2010), 173–75; Fletcher,
      Bottled Lightning, 13–17.
Hot air balloons and blimps: David Macaulay, The Way Things Work (Houghton Miﬄin
      Company, 1988), 103, 112–13.
An airplane’s wings: Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 168–71.
A jet engine may not look like it: Ibid., 175–76.
silicon chip sandwich: Mark Johnson, Photodetection and Measurement: Maximizing
      Performance in Optical Systems (McGraw-Hill Education, 2003), 1–11; Ben G.
      Streetman and Sanjay Banerjee, Solid State Electronic Devices, 5th ed. (Prentice Hall,
      2000), 379–86.
“bucket brigade principle”: See, for example, James R. Janesick, Scientiﬁc Charge-Coupled
      Devices (SPIE Press, 2001).
multitude of computer memory banks: Andrew Blum, Tubes: A Journey to the Center of
      the Internet (HarperCollins, 2012), 259; Prashant Gupta, A. Seetharaman, and John
      Rudolph Raj, “The Usage and Adoption of Cloud Computing by Small and Medium
      Businesses,” International Journal of Information Management 33, 861 (2013).
If the heat is not removed: Vaclav Smil, Energies: An Illustrated Guide to the Biosphere and
      Civilization (MIT Press, 1999), 200.
Heat management is a major issue: Matt McKinney, “Selling the Cold, Minnesota’s Tech
      Community Welcomes Data Centers,” Minneapolis Star Tribune, December 13, 2014.
data centers run by Google: James Glanz, “Google Details, and Defends, Its Use of
      Electricity,” New York Times, September 8, 2011; though Google’s carbon footprint is
      scheduled to change: Quentin Hardy, “Google Says Its Data Centers Will Run Entirely
      on Renewable Energy by 2017,” New York Times, December 7, 2016.
Sound is manifested by density variations: Paul A. Tipler and Gene Mosca, Physics for
      Scientists and Engineers, vol. 1, 6th ed. (W. H. Freeman, 2007), 502–503.
Noise-canceling headphones record: S. J. Elliott and P. A. Nelson, “Active Noise Control,”
      IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, October 1993; Scott D. Snyder, Active Noise Control
      Primer (Modern Acoustics and Signal Processing) (Springer, 2000), 3–5.
The constituents of atoms: Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of Atoms,
     Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 1985), 272–78,
     434–37.
magnetically levitating trains: David Scott, “At Last, Maglev Goes Public: Britain’s Flying
     Train,” Popular Science, October 1984; Scott R. Gourley, “Track to the Future,”
     Popular Mechanics, May 1998; see, for example, Hyung-Suk Han and Dong-Sung Kim,
     Magnetic Levitation: Maglev Technology and Applications (Springer Tracts on
     Transportation and Traﬃc, 2016).
CHAPTER SIX: YOU GIVE A BUSINESS PRESENTATION
To make a transistor: Barry M. Lunt, Marvels of Modern Electronics: A Survey (Dover,
      2013), 23–32.
a third metal plate, buried within the insulating glass: D. Kahng and S. M. Sze, “A
      Floating-Gate and Its Application to Memory Devices,” The Bell System Technical
      Journal 46, 1288 (1967); R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti,
      “Introduction to Flash Memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE 91, 489 (2003). The physics
      of transistors with and without a ﬂoating gate is considered in James Kakalios, The
      Amazing Story of Quantum Mechanics (Gotham, 2010), 216–18.
discs with magnetic regions: Robert C. O’Handley, Modern Magnetic Materials: Principles
      and Applications (John Wiley & Sons, 2000), 674–721; Lunt, Marvels of Modern
      Electronics: A Survey, 153–56.
a quantum mechanical process termed “tunneling”: Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick,
      Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 2nd ed. (John Wiley
      & Sons, 1985), 205–209.
A photocopier starts with a semiconductor: H. Richard Crane, How Things Work
      (American Association of Physics Teachers, 1996), 18–19.
called “toner”: Dan A. Hays, “How Does a Photocopier Work?” Scientiﬁc American, March
      2003.
The seats in the lower-energy orchestra: Kakalios, The Amazing Story of Quantum
      Mechanics, 198–201.
To quote David Owen: David Owen, “Copies in Seconds,” The Atlantic Monthly, February
      1986.
One form of ink-jet printing: Marshall Brain, MORE How Stuﬀ Works (John Wiley &
      Sons, 2002), 232–33.
made up of an amorphous semiconductor: See, for example, S. R. Elliott, Physics of
      Amorphous Materials (Longman Scientiﬁc & Technical, 1983).
A crystalline seed is dipped: Ben G. Streetman and Sanjay Banerjee, Solid State Electronic
      Devices, 5th ed. (Prentice Hall, 2000), 12–16.
A liquid crystal is a true ﬂuid: See, for example, Peter J. Collings, Liquid Crystals: Nature’s
      Delicate Phase of Matter (Princeton University Press, 1990).
ﬂat panel displays: See, for example, Jiun-Haw Lee, David N. Liu, and Shin-Tson Wu,
      Introduction to Flat Panel Displays (John Wiley & Sons, 2009); and Robert H. Chen,
      Liquid Crystal Displays: Fundamental Physics and Technology (John Wiley & Sons,
      2011).
A diode consists of two semiconductors: John P. McKelvey, Solid State and Semiconductor
      Physics (Harper & Row, 1966), 390–98, 408–16.
Shine light on the semiconductor: Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 7th ed.
      (John Wiley & Sons, 1996), 570–74.
This is a light-emitting diode (LED): Nick Holonyak, “From Transistors to Lasers to
      Light-Emitting Diodes,” MRS Bulletin 30, 509 (2005); Chris Woodford, Atoms Under
      the Floorboard (Bloomsbury Sigma, 2015), 159–61. The physics of light-emitting
      diodes and laser diodes is described in Kakalios, The Amazing Story of Quantum
      Mechanics, 184–87, 207–209.
To turn an LED into a semiconductor laser: Winston Kock, Lasers and Holography: An
      Introduction to Coherent Optics, 2nd ed. (Dover, 1981).
The ﬁrst semiconductor laser diodes: Louis Bloomﬁeld, How Everything Works, 5th ed.
      (John Wiley & Sons, 2008), 26–32, 475.
Microphones in early models of landline telephones: See, for example, Glen Ballou, ed.,
      Electroacoustic Devices: Microphones and Loudspeakers (Focal Press, 2009); and M. D.
      Fagen, ed., A History of Engineering and Science in the Bell System: The Early Years
      (1875–1925) (Bell Telephone Laboratories, 1975).
In a condenser microphone: Alexander Case, “The Vocal Microphone: Technology and
      Practice,” Physics Today, March 2016.
“ribbon microphones”: Ibid.
The “electret microphone”: Leo L. Beranek and Tim Mellow, Acoustics: Sound Fields and
      Transducers (Academic Press, 2012), 397–400.
roughly a few electron-Volts: See, for example, Roy McWeeny, Coulson’s Valence (Oxford
      University Press, 1979).
Microwave ovens use electromagnetic waves: Michael Vollmer, “Physics of the Microwave
      Oven,” Physics Education 39, 74 (2004).
This force is called the Strong Force: A. Das and T. Ferbel, Introduction to Nuclear and
      Particle Physics, 2nd ed. (World Scientiﬁc, 2003), 45–50.
The predominant forms of radiation: George Gamow, The Atom and Its Nucleus (Prentice
      Hall, 1961), 78–81.
One way to eliminate the bacteria: Jozsef Farkas and Csilla Mohacsi-Farkas, “History and
      Future of Food Irradiation,” Trends in Food Science & Technology 22, 121 (2011).
irradiated food is not itself radioactive: There is a phenomenon termed “induced
      radioactivity,” where a stable nucleus can be transmuted into an unstable and hence
      radioactive nucleus. However, this occurs only if the nucleus is exposed to an external
      source of neutrons, and does not occur with the gammas, x-rays, and beta particles used
      in food sterilization.
CHAPTER SEVEN: YOU GO TO A HOTEL
accelerometers that exploit: Jon S. Wilson, Sensor Technology Handbook, vol. 1 (Elsevier,
      2005), 137–53; S. Beeby, G. Ensell, M. Kraft, and N. White, MEMS Mechanical
      Sensors (Artech House Inc., 2004), 175–95; O. Sidek, M. N. Mat Nawi, and M. A,
      Miskam, “Analysis of Low-g Capacitive Cantilever-Mass Micro-Machined
      Accelerometers,” International Joural of Engineering & Technology 10, 133 (2010).
To record your pulse: See, for example, John G. Webster, ed., Design of Pulse Oximeters
      (CRC Press, 1997).
The motion sensor detects this infrared light: Jacob Fraden, Handbook of Modern
      Sensors: Physics, Designs and Applications, 4th ed. (Springer, 2010), 95–100, 487–91.
Roughly half of the energy: Vaclav Smil, Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics
      of Complex Systems (MIT Press, 2008), 124–27.
“pyroelectric detector”: See, for example, A. K. Batra and M. D. Aggarwal, Pyroelectric
      Materials: Infrared Detectors, Particle Accelerators and Energy Harvesters (SPIE Press,
      2013).
“active” motion sensors: Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors, 249–54.
passive card-entry system: See, for example, Robert N. Reid, Facility Manager’s Guide to
      Security: Protecting Your Assets (Fairmont Press, 2005); Thomas Norman, Electronic
      Access Control (Butterworth-Heinemann, 2011).
Active proximity cards: Ibid.
To make a remote control device: See, for example, Julia Layton, “How Remote Controls
      Work,” November 10, 2005, http://electronics.howstuﬀworks.com/remote-control.htm.
band structure of solids: Charles Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, 7th ed. (John
      Wiley & Sons, 1996), 173–94.
what we know about molecules: Robert Eisberg and Robert Resnick, Quantum Physics of
      Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles, 2nd ed. (John Wiley & Sons, 1985),
      422–32.
“greenhouse gas”: Vaclav Smil, Energy in Nature and Society: General Energetics of
      Complex Systems (MIT Press, 2008), 33–34.
“organic light-emitting diodes” (OLEDs): Eliav I. Haskal, Michael Buchel, Paul C.
      Duineveld, Aad Sempel, and Peter van de Weijer, “Passive-Matrix Polymer Light-
      Emitting Displays,” MRS Bulletin, November 2002; Jiun-Haw Lee, David N. Liu, and
      Shin-Tson Wu, Introduction to Flat Panel Displays (John Wiley & Sons, 2009).
blue light OLED: Hungshin Fu, Yi-Ming Cheng, Pi-Tai Chou, and Yun Chi, “Feeling Blue?
      Blue Phosphors for OLEDs,” Materials Today 14, 472 (2011); Jeong-A Seo, Sang Kyu
      Jeon, Myoung Seon Gong, Jun Yeob Lee, Chang Ho Noh, and Sung Han Kim, “Long
      Lifetime Blue Phosphorescent Organic Light-Emitting Diodes with an Exciton
      Blocking Layer,” Journal of Materials Chemistry C 3, 4640 (2015).
the important issue is energy density: Vaclav Smil, Energy: A Beginner’s Guide (Oneworld
      Publications, 2006), 15–16. The impracticalities of ﬂying cars using conventional fuel is
      discussed in James Kakalios, The Physics of Superheroes: Spectacular Second Edition
      (Gotham Books, 2009), 151–52.
how much stored chemical potential energy can you carry per pound of fuel?: A pound
      of wood contains approximately 6.8 million Joules of energy. (Recall that one way that
      energy can be measured is in Joules, where an average person taking a jaunty stroll will
      have roughly ﬁfty Joules of kinetic energy.) While this may sound like a lot, coal and
      natural gas have over twice the energy per pound, with gasoline having 20.5 million
      Joules per pound. There are fuels with even higher energy densities, such as hydrogen
      gas (consisting of two hydrogen atoms bound together). At 52 million Joules per pound,
      hydrogen has an even higher energy density than gasoline, due to its unique
      combination of large potential energy stored in its chemical bonds, and the lowest
      weight of any molecule. However, gasoline is easier (and hence cheaper) to store and
      transport than hydrogen gas, and once the decision was made roughly a hundred years
      ago to use a particular fuel in the early-model internal combustion engines, it is not a
      simple matter to change, even with hydrogen’s promise of over twice the energy bang
      for the buck. (The fear of an actual bang for a buck is another issue with all-hydrogen
      cars, though a gasoline ﬁre can be just as, if not more, dangerous.) Smil, Energy: A
      Beginner’s Guide, 16.
If two deuterium nuclei are fused: Charles Seife, Sun in a Bottle (Viking, 2008), 139–41.
the best energy densities: See, for example, B. E. Conway, Electrochemical Supercapacitors:
      Scientiﬁc Fundamentals and Technological Applications (Springer, 1999); and Hector D.
      Abruna, Yasuyuki Kiya, and Jay C. Henderson, “Batteries and Electrochemical
      Capacitors,” Physics Today 61, 43 (2008).
Such carbon is termed “activated”: Elzbieta Frackowiak and Francois Beguin, “Carbon
      Materials for the Electrochemical Storage of Energy in Capacitors,” Carbon 39, 937
      (2001).
are termed “ultra-capacitors,” or “super-capacitors”: Joel Schindall, “The Charge of the
      Ultra-Capacitors,” IEEE Spectrum 44, 42 (2007); Phillip Ball, “A Capacity for
      Change,” MRS Bulletin 37, 1000 (2012).
                                 FIGURE CAPTIONS




Figure 1
Sketch of a pendulum with a positively charged bob swinging back and forth. (a) When bob
is at its highest point on the left, there is no kinetic energy, but the potential energy is
maximum, and there is no current (the charge is not moving). (b) Bob at its lowest point has a
large kinetic energy, but no potential energy. There is a large electrical current to the right.
(c) Bob at its highest point, at the right, again has no kinetic energy, but the potential energy
is again maximum, and there is no current. (d) When bob is moving to the left at the
midpoint of its swing, there is some kinetic and some potential energy, and there is an
electrical current to the left, which is changing as the charge is speeding up and also changing
direction.
Figure 2
Sketch of a radio transmitter and receiver. An electron current oscillates up and down the
transmitter (top) and generates an electromagnetic wave with the same frequency as the
current’s oscillation. When this wave intersects the metal antenna (bottom), it induces
electrons in the metal to oscillate with the same frequency as the wave. This physical
principle is employed in an E-ZPass system, a garage door opener, and a keyless entry
remote.
Figure 3
Sketch of an x-ray scan. The top drawing shows an x-ray tube, where an electron current is
drawn from the coil on the left toward the plate on the right. The sudden deceleration of the
electron current leads to the creation of high-frequency electromagnetic waves termed “x-
rays.” When these x-rays are directed to your ankle, they interact with the atoms in your
body. The more electrons the atom has, the more strongly it scatters x-rays from their original
path. The x-rays are deﬂected by the bone, but pass through the tissue. The detector plate
thus records a high x-ray ﬂux except where bones are present.
Figure 4
Sketch of a parallel-plate capacitor as used in a touch screen display. The two plates of a
transparent conductor are separated by a thin insulator. Excess electrical charges on your
ﬁngertip change the charge density on the capacitor plates, at the location touched.
Figure 5
Sketch of the cross-section of an airplane wing, showing the ﬂow of air past the wing. The
wing is angled so that air striking the bottom surface is deﬂected downward, and due to
Newton’s third law (forces come in pairs), the air exerts an equal and opposite upward force
(termed “lift”) on the bottom of the wing.
Figure 6.1
Sketch of a liquid crystal display (LCD) pixel. In the top drawing, unpolarized white light
passes through a vertical polarizer that passes light with its oscillating electric ﬁeld in the
vertical plane. The polarization of the light twists along with the liquid crystal molecules, so
the light is able to pass through the second polarizer, which is oriented in the horizontal
position. In the bottom drawing, an electric ﬁeld is applied across the cell using a capacitor
with transparent conductors for plates. The liquid crystal now shifts into a phase where it
does not rotate into the horizontal plane, so the polarized light is unable to pass through the
second polarizer, and the pixel is now dark.
Figure 6.2
Sketch of a p–n junction semiconductor—a diode. In the upper drawing there is a built-in
electric ﬁeld across the boundary between the semiconductor with an excess of electrons (n-
type) on the left and the semiconductor with an excess of holes (p-type) on the right. If a
current is forced through the junction, in opposition to this built-in electric ﬁeld, then at the
junction, the electrons lower their energy by falling into the holes, releasing photons of light
—this is a light-emitting diode. In the lower drawing, the reverse process is shown. Light is
incident on the device, and electrons are promoted from the lower ﬁlled band to the higher
energy empty band, leaving holes behind in the lower band of states. The built-in electric
ﬁeld of the diode now pushes the electrons to the left and the holes to the right—a current
results when light is absorbed. This is a photodiode, or a solar cell.
Figure 7
A ﬂying car, with four small jet engines at the wheel locations. The challenge of building
such a vehicle is carrying enough fuel with a high enough energy density that the trip lasts
more than a few minutes.
                   ABOUT THE AUTHOR




JAMES KAKALIOS is the Taylor Distinguished Professor in the
School of Physics and Astronomy at the University of Minnesota
and the author of the bestselling The Physics of Superheroes. He
is a condensed matter experimentalist whose research concerns
amorphous/nanocrystalline composite semiconductor materials
and ﬂuctuation phenomena in neurological systems. He is the
recipient of a regional Emmy Award, and his eﬀorts at public
outreach and science communication have been recognized by
awards from the American Institute of Physics and the American
Association for the Advancement of Science.
                     Wat’s next on
                   your reading list?
                     Discover your next
                         great read!

Get personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author.
                         Sign up now.
